The First Book of Moses: Called Genesis

Chapter 1

1 In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
2 The earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep.
And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
3 God said, Let there be light: and there was light.
4 God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness.
5 God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night.
And the evening and the morning were the first day.
6 God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,
and let it divide the waters from the waters.
7 God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the
waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.
8 God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second
day.
9 God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place,
and let the dry land appear: and it was so.
10 God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he
Seas: and God saw that it was good.
11 God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed,
and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself,
upon the earth: and it was so.
12 The earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind,
and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself,
after his kind: and God saw that it was good.
13 The evening and the morning were the third day.
14 God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from
the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:
15 Let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth:
and it was so.
16 God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.
17 God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,
18 To rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness:
and God saw that it was good.
19 The evening and the morning were the fourth day.
20 God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that has life,
and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.
21 God created great whales, and every living creature that moves,
which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind,
and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.
22 God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas,
and let fowl multiply in the earth.
23 The evening and the morning were the fifth day.
24 God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle,
and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.
25 God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind,
and every thing that creeps upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was
good.
26 God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle,
and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.
27 So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him;
male and female created he them.
28 God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply,
and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea,
and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon the earth.
29 God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree,
in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.
30 To every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air,
and to every thing that creeps upon the earth, wherein there is life,
I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.
31 God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good.
And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.

Chapter 2

1 Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
2 On the seventh day God ended his work which he had made;
and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.
3 God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from
all his work which God created and made.
4 These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created,
in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens,
5 Every plant of the field before it was in the earth,
and every herb of the field before it grew: for the LORD God had not caused it to rain
upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.
6 But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.
7 The LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.
8 The LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had
formed.
9 Out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight,
and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden,
and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
10 A river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from there it was parted,
and became into four heads.
11 The name of the first is Pison: that is it which goes around the whole land of
Havilah, where there is gold;
12 The gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.
13 The name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that goes around the whole land
of Ethiopia.
14 The name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goes toward the east of
Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.
15 The LORD God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep
it.
16 The LORD God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden you may freely
eat:
17 But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
you shall not eat of it: for in the day that you eat thereof you shall surely die.
18 The LORD God said, It is not good that the man should be alone;
I will make him an help meet for him.
19 Out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field,
and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and
whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof.
20 Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air,
and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for
him.
21 The LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam,
and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;
22 The rib, which the LORD God had taken from man, made he a woman,
and brought her unto the man.
23 Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called
Woman, because she was taken out of Man.
24 Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother,
and shall hold fast unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.
25 They were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

Chapter 3

1 Now the serpent was more cunning than any beast of the field which the LORD God had
made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, has God said,
you shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
2 The woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the
garden:
3 But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God has said,
you shall not eat of it, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.
4 The serpent said unto the woman, you shall not surely die:
5 For God does know that in the day you eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened,
and you shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.
6 When the woman saw that the tree was good for food,
and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise,
she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her;
and he did eat.
7 The eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked;
and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.
8 They heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and
Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of
the garden.
9 The LORD God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where are you?
10 He said, I heard your voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked;
and I hid myself.
11 He said, Who told you that you were naked? have you eaten of the tree,
of which I commanded you that you should not eat?
12 The man said, The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree,
and I did eat.
13 The LORD God said unto the woman, What is this that you have done?
And the woman said, The serpent deceived me, and I did eat.
14 The LORD God said unto the serpent, Because you have done this,
you are cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field;
upon your belly shall you go, and dust shall you eat all the days of your life:
15 I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed;
it shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel.
16 Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply your sorrow and your conception;
in sorrow you shall bring forth children; and your desire shall be to your husband,
and he shall rule over you.
17 Unto Adam he said, Because you have hearkened unto the voice of your wife,
and have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded you, saying,
you shall not eat of it: cursed is the ground for your sake;
in sorrow shall you eat of it all the days of your life;
18 Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to you;
and you shall eat the herb of the field;
19 In the sweat of your face shall you eat bread, till you return unto the ground;
for out of it were you taken: for dust you are, and unto dust shall you return.
20 Adam called his wife’s name Eve; because she was the mother of all living.
21 Unto Adam also and to his wife did the LORD God make coats of skins,
and clothed them.
22 The LORD God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us,
to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand,
and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:
23 Therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden,
to till the ground from where he was taken.
24 So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims,
and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.

Chapter 4

1 Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and gave birth to Cain, and said,
I have gotten a man from the LORD.
2 She again gave birth to his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep,
but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
3 In process of time that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the
LORD.
4 Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof.
And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his offering:
5 But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect.
And Cain was very angry, and his countenance fell.
6 The LORD said unto Cain, Why are you angry? and why is your countenance fallen?
7 If you do well, shall you not be accepted? and if you do not well,
sin lies at the door. And unto you shall be his desire, and you shall rule over him.
8 Cain talked with Abel his brother: When they were in the field,
that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and killed him.
9 The LORD said unto Cain, Where is Abel your brother?
And he said, I know not: Am I my brother’s keeper?
10 He said, What have you done? the voice of your brother’s blood cries unto me from the
ground.
11 Now are you cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth to receive your
brother’s blood from your hand;
12 When you till the ground, it shall not from now on yield unto you her strength;
a fugitive and a vagabond shall you be in the earth.
13 Cain said unto the LORD, My punishment is greater than I can bear.
14 Behold, you have driven me out this day from the face of the earth;
and from your face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth;
and it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me shall kill me.
15 The LORD said unto him, Therefore whosoever kills Cain,
vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the LORD set a mark upon Cain,
lest any finding him should kill him.
16 Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and lived in the land of Nod,
on the east of Eden.
17 Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and gave birth to Enoch: and he built a city,
and called the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.
18 Unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad became the father of Mehujael: and Mehujael became
the father of Methusael: and Methusael became the father of Lamech.
19 Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah,
and the name of the other Zillah.
20 Adah gave birth to Jabal: he was the father of such as live in tents,
and of such as have cattle.
21 His brother’s name was Jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and
organ.
22 Zillah, she also gave birth to Tubalcain, an instructer of every artificer in brass
and iron: and the sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.
23 Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice;
you wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have killed a man to my wounding,
and a young man to my hurt.
24 If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.
25 Adam knew his wife again; and she gave birth to a son,
and called his name Seth: For God, said she, has appointed me another seed instead of
Abel, whom Cain killed.
26 To Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enos: then began men
to call upon the name of the LORD.

Chapter 5

1 This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man,
in the likeness of God made he him;
2 Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam,
in the day when they were created.
3 Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and became the father of a son in his own
likeness, and after his image; and called his name Seth:
4 The days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years: and he became the
father of sons and daughters:
5 All the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died.
6 Seth lived an hundred and five years, and became the father of Enos:
7 Seth lived after he became the father of Enos eight hundred and seven years,
and became the father of sons and daughters:
8 All the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he died.
9 Enos lived ninety years, and became the father of Cainan:
10 Enos lived after he became the father of Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years,
and became the father of sons and daughters:
11 All the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and he died.
12 Cainan lived seventy years and became the father of Mahalaleel:
13 Cainan lived after he became the father of Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years,
and became the father of sons and daughters:
14 All the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died.
15 Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and became the father of Jared:
16 Mahalaleel lived after he became the father of Jared eight hundred and thirty years,
and became the father of sons and daughters:
17 All the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.
18 Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he became the father of Enoch:
19 Jared lived after he became the father of Enoch eight hundred years,
and became the father of sons and daughters:
20 All the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died.
21 Enoch lived sixty and five years, and became the father of Methuselah:
22 Enoch walked with God after he became the father of Methuselah three hundred years,
and became the father of sons and daughters:
23 All the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:
24 Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him.
25 Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years,
and became the father of Lamech.
26 Methuselah lived after he became the father of Lamech seven hundred eighty and two
years, and became the father of sons and daughters:
27 All the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.
28 Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and became the father of a son:
29 He called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and
toil of our hands, because of the ground which the LORD has cursed.
30 Lamech lived after he became the father of Noah five hundred ninety and five years,
and became the father of sons and daughters:
31 All the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.
32 Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah became the father of Shem, Ham,
and Japheth.

Chapter 6

1 When men began to multiply on the face of the earth,
and daughters were born unto them,
2 That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair;
and they took them wives of all which they chose.
3 The LORD said, My spirit shall not always strive with man,
for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.
4 There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that,
when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men,
and they gave birth to children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old,
men of renown.
5 God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth,
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
6 It repented the LORD that he had made man on the earth,
and it grieved him at his heart.
7 The LORD said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth;
both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air;
for it repents me that I have made them.
8 But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD.
9 These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations,
and Noah walked with God.
10 Noah became the father of three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
11 The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.
12 God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt;
for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.
13 God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me;
for the earth is filled with violence through them;
and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
14 Make you an ark of gopher wood; rooms shall you make in the ark,
and shall pitch it within and without with pitch.
15 This is the fashion which you shall make it of: The length of the ark shall be three
hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.
16 A window shall you make to the ark, and in a cubit shall you finish it above;
and the door of the ark shall you set in the side thereof;
with lower, second, and third stories shall you make it.
17 And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth,
to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven;
and every thing that is in the earth shall die.
18 But with you will I establish my covenant; and you shall come into the ark, you,
and your sons, and your wife, and your sons’ wives with you.
19 Of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shall you bring into the ark,
to keep them alive with you; they shall be male and female.
20 Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind,
of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind,
two of every sort shall come unto you, to keep them alive.
21 Take you unto you of all food that is eaten, and you shall gather it to you;
and it shall be for food for you, and for them.
22 Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he.

Chapter 7

1 The LORD said unto Noah, Come you and all your house into the ark;
for you have I seen righteous before me in this generation.
2 Of every clean beast you shall take to you by sevens,
the male and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two,
the male and his female.
3 Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female;
to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.
4 For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty
nights; and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of
the earth.
5 Noah did according unto all that the LORD commanded him.
6 Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
7 Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him, into the ark,
because of the waters of the flood.
8 Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls,
and of every thing that creeps upon the earth,
9 There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female,
as God had commanded Noah.
10 After seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.
11 In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month,
the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep
broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.
12 The rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
13 In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah,
and Noah’s wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;
14 They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind,
and every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth after his kind,
and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort.
15 They went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh,
wherein is the breath of life.
16 They that went in, went in male and female of all flesh,
as God had commanded him: and the LORD shut him in.
17 The flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased,
and gave birth to up the ark, and it was lifted up above the earth.
18 The waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth;
and the ark went upon the face of the waters.
19 The waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth;
and all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.
20 Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered.
21 All flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast,
and of every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth, and every man:
22 All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land,
died.
23 Every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man,
and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven;
and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained alive,
and they that were with him in the ark.
24 The waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.

Chapter 8

1 God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in
the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters went down;
2 The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped,
and the rain from heaven was restrained;
3 The waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the end of the hundred
and fifty days the waters were abated.
4 The ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month,
upon the mountains of Ararat.
5 The waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth month,
on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.
6 At the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made:
7 He sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro,
until the waters were dried up from off the earth.
8 Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face
of the ground;
9 But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot,
and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole
earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the
ark.
10 He stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark;
11 The dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo,
in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from
off the earth.
12 He stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove;
which returned not again unto him any more.
13 In the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month,
the waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark,
and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.
14 In the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month,
was the earth dried.
15 God spoke unto Noah, saying,
16 Go forth of the ark, you, and your wife, and your sons,
and your sons’ wives with you.
17 Bring forth with you every living thing that is with you, of all flesh, both of fowl,
and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth;
that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful,
and multiply upon the earth.
18 Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him:
19 Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl,
and whatsoever creeps upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.
20 Noah built an altar unto the LORD; and took of every clean beast,
and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
21 The LORD smelled a sweet savour; and the LORD said in his heart,
I will not again curse the ground any more for man’s sake;
for the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth;
neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done.
22 While the earth remains, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat,
and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

Chapter 9

1 God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply,
and replenish the earth.
2 The fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth,
and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moves upon the earth,
and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.
3 Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you;
even as the green herb have I given you all things.
4 But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall you not eat.
5 Surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I
require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man’s brother will I require the
life of man.
6 Whoever sheds man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made
he man.
7 You, be you fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the earth,
and multiply therein.
8 God spoke unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,
9 I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you;
10 With every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle,
and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark,
to every beast of the earth.
11 I will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by
the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.
12 God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every
living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations:
13 I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and
the earth.
14 It shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth,
that the bow shall be seen in the cloud:
15 I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of
all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
16 The bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it,
that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all
flesh that is upon the earth.
17 God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant,
which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.
18 The sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham,
and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan.
19 These are the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread.
20 Noah began to be a farmer, and he planted a vineyard:
21 He drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.
22 Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father,
and told his two brethren without.
23 Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders,
and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father;
and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father’s nakedness.
24 Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.
25 He said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.
26 He said, Blessed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.
27 God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall live in the tents of Shem;
and Canaan shall be his servant.
28 Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.
29 All the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he died.

Chapter 10

1 Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham,
and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.
2 The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech,
and Tiras.
3 The sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
4 The sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.
5 By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands;
every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.
6 The sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.
7 The sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah,
and Sabtechah: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.
8 Cush became the father of Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.
9 He was a mighty hunter before the LORD: wherefore it is said,
Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the LORD.
10 The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh,
in the land of Shinar.
11 Out of that land went forth Asshur, and built Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth,
and Calah,
12 Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.
13 Mizraim became the father of Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,
14 Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim.
15 Canaan became the father of Sidon his first born, and Heth,
16 The Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,
17 The Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
18 The Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of
the Canaanites spread abroad.
19 The border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as you come to Gerar, unto Gaza;
as you go, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.
20 These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues,
in their countries, and in their nations.
21 Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber,
the brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born.
22 The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.
23 The children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
24 Arphaxad became the father of Salah; and Salah became the father of Eber.
25 Unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg;
for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother’s name was Joktan.
26 Joktan became the father of Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,
27 Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
28 Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
29 Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these were the sons of Joktan.
30 Their living was from Mesha, as you go unto Sephar a mount of the east.
31 These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands,
after their nations.
32 These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations,
in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.

Chapter 11

1 The whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.
2 As they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar;
and they lived there.
3 They said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them thoroughly.
And they had brick for stone, and bitumen had they for morter.
4 They said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven;
and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole
earth.
5 The LORD came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men built.
6 The LORD said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language;
and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them,
which they have imagined to do.
7 Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language,
that they may not understand one another’s speech.
8 So the LORD scattered them abroad from there upon the face of all the earth: and they
left off to build the city.
9 Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the LORD did there confound the
language of all the earth: and from there did the LORD scatter them abroad upon the face
of all the earth.
10 These are the generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years old,
and became the father of Arphaxad two years after the flood:
11 Shem lived after he became the father of Arphaxad five hundred years,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
12 Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and became the father of Salah:
13 Arphaxad lived after he became the father of Salah four hundred and three years,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
14 Salah lived thirty years, and became the father of Eber:
15 Salah lived after he became the father of Eber four hundred and three years,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
16 Eber lived four and thirty years, and became the father of Peleg:
17 Eber lived after he became the father of Peleg four hundred and thirty years,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
18 Peleg lived thirty years, and became the father of Reu:
19 Peleg lived after he became the father of Reu two hundred and nine years,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
20 Reu lived two and thirty years, and became the father of Serug:
21 Reu lived after he became the father of Serug two hundred and seven years,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
22 Serug lived thirty years, and became the father of Nahor:
23 Serug lived after he became the father of Nahor two hundred years,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
24 Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and became the father of Terah:
25 Nahor lived after he became the father of Terah an hundred and nineteen years,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
26 Terah lived seventy years, and became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
27 Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah became the father of Abram, Nahor,
and Haran; and Haran became the father of Lot.
28 Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity,
in Ur of the Chaldees.
29 Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram’s wife was Sarai;
and the name of Nahor’s wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah,
and the father of Iscah.
30 But Sarai was barren; she had no child.
31 Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son’s son,
and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram’s wife;
and they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan;
and they came unto Haran, and lived there.
32 The days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah died in Haran.

Chapter 12

1 Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get you out of your country, and from your kindred,
and from your father’s house, unto a land that I will show you:
2 I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you, and make your name great;
and you shall be a blessing:
3 I will bless them that bless you, and curse him that curses you: and in you shall all
families of the earth be blessed.
4 So Abram departed, as the LORD had spoken unto him;
and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of
Haran.
5 Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother’s son,
and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in
Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan;
and into the land of Canaan they came.
6 Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh.
And the Canaanite was then in the land.
7 The LORD appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto your seed will I give this land: and there
built he an altar unto the LORD, who appeared unto him.
8 He removed from there unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent,
having Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east: and there he built an altar unto the
LORD, and called upon the name of the LORD.
9 Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.
10 There was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there;
for the famine was grievous in the land.
11 When he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife,
Behold now, I know that you are a fair woman to look upon:
12 Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see you,
that they shall say, This is his wife: and they will kill me,
but they will save you alive.
13 Say, please, you are my sister: that it may be well with me for your sake;
and my soul shall live because of you.
14 That, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very
fair.
15 The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and the woman
was taken into Pharaoh’s house.
16 He entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses,
and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels.
17 The LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram’s
wife.
18 Pharaoh called Abram and said, What is this that you have done unto me?
why did you not tell me that she was your wife?
19 Why said you, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore
behold your wife, take her, and go your way.
20 Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife,
and all that he had.

Chapter 13

1 Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him,
into the south.
2 Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
3 He went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel,
unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai;
4 Unto the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first: and there Abram
called on the name of the LORD.
5 Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.
6 The land was not able to bear them, that they might live together: for their substance
was great, so that they could not live together.
7 There was a strife between the herdmen of Abram’s cattle and the herdmen of Lot’s
cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite lived then in the land.
8 Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, please, between me and you,
and between my herdmen and your herdmen; for we be brethren.
9 Is not the whole land before you? separate yourself, please,
from me: if you will take the left hand, then I will go to the right;
or if you depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.
10 Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan,
that it was well watered every where, before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah,
even as the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt, as you come unto Zoar.
11 Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated
themselves the one from the other.
12 Abram lived in the land of Canaan, and Lot lived in the cities of the plain,
and pitched his tent toward Sodom.
13 But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the LORD exceedingly.
14 The LORD said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him,
lifted up now your eyes, and look from the place where you are northward, and southward,
and eastward, and westward:
15 For all the land which you see, to you will I give it, and to your seed for ever.
16 I will make your seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust
of the earth, then shall your seed also be numbered.
17 Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it;
for I will give it unto you.
18 Then Abram removed his tent, and came and lived in the plain of Mamre,
which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the LORD.

Chapter 14

1 In the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar,
Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations;
2 That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah,
Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela,
which is Zoar.
3 All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.
4 Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
5 In the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him,
and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham,
and the Emins in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
6 The Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which is by the wilderness.
7 They returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh,
and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites,
that lived in Hazezontamar.
8 There went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah,
and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar;) and they joined battle
with them in the vale of Siddim;
9 With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations,
and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with five.
10 The vale of Siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled,
and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain.
11 They took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their victuals,
and went their way.
12 They took Lot, Abram’s brother’s son, who lived in Sodom, and his goods,
and departed.
13 There came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew;
for he lived in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol,
and brother of Aner: and these were confederate with Abram.
14 When Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants,
born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.
15 He divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them,
and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.
16 He brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods,
and the women also, and the people.
17 The king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of
Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh,
which is the king’s dale.
18 Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the
most high God.
19 He blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God,
possessor of heaven and earth:
20 Blessed be the most high God, which has delivered your enemies into your hand.
And he gave him tithes of all.
21 The king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons,
and take the goods to yourself.
22 Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lifted up mine hand unto the LORD,
the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,
23 That I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet,
and that I will not take any thing that is your, lest you should say,
I have made Abram rich:
24 Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went
with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their portion.

Chapter 15

1 After these things the word of the LORD came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not,
Abram: I am your shield, and your exceeding great reward.
2 Abram said, LORD God, what will you give me, seeing I go childless,
and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?
3 Abram said, Behold, to me you have given no seed: and, lo,
one born in my house is mine heir.
4 And, behold, the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, This shall not be your heir;
but he that shall come forth out of your own bowels shall be your heir.
5 He brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars,
if you be able to number them: and he said unto him, So shall your seed be.
6 He believed in the LORD; and he counted it to him for righteousness.
7 He said unto him, I am the LORD that brought you out of Ur of the Chaldees,
to give you this land to inherit it.
8 He said, LORD God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?
9 He said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old,
and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove,
and a young pigeon.
10 He took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst,
and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.
11 When the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away.
12 When the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram;
and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.
13 He said unto Abram, Know of a surety that your seed shall be a stranger in a land that
is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;
14 Also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come
out with great substance.
15 You shall go to your fathers in peace; you shall be buried in a good old age.
16 But in the fourth generation they shall come here again: for the iniquity of the
Amorites is not yet full.
17 That, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace,
and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.
18 In the same day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying,
Unto your seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river,
the river Euphrates:
19 The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,
20 The Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,
21 The Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.

Chapter 16

1 Now Sarai Abram’s wife gave birth to him no children: and she had a servant girl,
an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.
2 Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the LORD has restrained me from bearing: please,
go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her.
And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.
3 Sarai Abram’s wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian,
after Abram had lived ten years in the land of Canaan,
and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife.
4 He went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived,
her mistress was despised in her eyes.
5 Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon you: I have given my maid into your bosom;
and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the LORD judge
between me and you.
6 But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, your maid is in your hand;
do to her as it pleases you. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her,
she fled from her face.
7 The angel of the LORD found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness,
by the fountain in the way to Shur.
8 He said, Hagar, Sarai’s maid, where came you? and where will you go?
And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.
9 The angel of the LORD said unto her, Return to your mistress,
and submit yourself under her hands.
10 The angel of the LORD said unto her, I will multiply your seed exceedingly,
that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
11 The angel of the LORD said unto her, Behold, you are with child and shall bear a son,
and shall call his name Ishmael; because the LORD has heard your affliction.
12 He will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man,
and every man’s hand against him; and he shall live in the presence of all his
brethren.
13 She called the name of the LORD that spoke unto her, you God see me: for she said,
Have I also here looked after him that sees me?
14 Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold,
it is between Kadesh and Bered.
15 Hagar gave birth to Abram a son: and Abram called his son’s name,
which Hagar gave birth to, Ishmael.
16 Abram was eighty and six years old, when Hagar gave birth to Ishmael to Abram.

Chapter 17

1 When Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD appeared to Abram,
and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be you perfect.
2 I will make my covenant between me and you, and will multiply you exceedingly.
3 Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,
4 As for me, behold, my covenant is with you, and you shall be a father of many
nations.
5 Neither shall your name any more be called Abram, but your name shall be Abraham;
for a father of many nations have I made you.
6 I will make you exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of you,
and kings shall come out of you.
7 I will establish my covenant between me and you and your seed after you in their
generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto you,
and to your seed after you.
8 I will give unto you, and to your seed after you, the land wherein you are a stranger,
all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.
9 God said unto Abraham, you shall keep my covenant therefore, you,
and your seed after you in their generations.
10 This is my covenant, which you shall keep, between me and you and your seed after you;
Every man child among you shall be circumcised.
11 You shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin;
and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.
12 He that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house,
or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of your seed.
13 He that is born in your house, and he that is bought with your money,
must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting
covenant.
14 The uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised,
that soul shall be cut off from his people; he has broken my covenant.
15 God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai your wife, you shall not call her name Sarai,
but Sarah shall her name be.
16 I will bless her, and give you a son also of her: yea, I will bless her,
and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her.
17 Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart,
Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old?
and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?
18 Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before you!
19 God said, Sarah your wife shall bear you a son indeed;
and you shall call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an
everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.
20 As for Ishmael, I have heard you: Behold, I have blessed him,
and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly;
twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.
21 But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto you at this
set time in the next year.
22 He left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.
23 Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house,
and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham’s house;
and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day,
as God had said unto him.
24 Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his
foreskin.
25 Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his
foreskin.
26 In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.
27 All the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger,
were circumcised with him.

Chapter 18

1 The LORD appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in the tent door in the
heat of the day;
2 He lifted up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw
them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground,
3 Said, My LORD, if now I have found favour in your sight, pass not away, please,
from your servant:
4 Let a little water, please, be fetched, and wash your feet,
and rest yourselves under the tree:
5 I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort you your hearts;
after that you shall pass on: for therefore are you come to your servant.
And they said, So do, as you have said.
6 Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said,
Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it,
and make cakes upon the hearth.
7 Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good,
and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.
8 He took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them;
and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat.
9 They said unto him, Where is Sarah your wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.
10 He said, I will certainly return unto you according to the time of life;
and, lo, Sarah your wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent door,
which was behind him.
11 Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age;
and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
12 Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have
pleasure, my lord being old also?
13 The LORD said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying,
Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?
14 Is any thing too hard for the LORD? At the time appointed I will return unto you,
according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.
15 Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid.
And he said, Nay; but you did laugh.
16 The men rose up from there, and looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to
bring them on the way.
17 The LORD said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;
18 Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation,
and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?
19 For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him,
and they shall keep the way of the LORD, to do justice and judgment;
that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.
20 The LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great,
and because their sin is very grievous;
21 I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of
it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.
22 The men turned their faces from there, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet
before the LORD.
23 Abraham drew near, and said, will you also destroy the righteous with the wicked?
24 Perhaps there be fifty righteous within the city: will you also destroy and not spare
the place for the fifty righteous that are therein?
25 That be far from you to do after this manner, to kill the righteous with the wicked:
and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from you: Shall not the Judge
of all the earth do right?
26 The LORD said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city,
then I will spare all the place for their sakes.
27 Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD,
which am but dust and ashes:
28 Perhaps there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: will you destroy all the city
for lack of five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it.
29 He spoke unto him yet again, and said, perhaps there shall be forty found there.
And he said, I will not do it for forty’s sake.
30 He said unto him, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak: perhaps there shall
thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.
31 He said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD: perhaps there shall
be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for twenty’s sake.
32 He said, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak yet but this once: perhaps ten
shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for ten’s sake.
33 The LORD went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham
returned unto his place.

Chapter 19

1 There came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot
seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the
ground;
2 He said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, please, into your servant’s house,
and stay all night, and wash your feet, and you shall rise up early, and go on your ways.
And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.
3 He pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house;
and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.
4 But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom,
compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter:
5 They called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to you this
night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.
6 Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,
7 Said, please, brethren, do not so wickedly.
8 Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man;
let me, please, bring them out unto you, and do you to them as is good in your eyes: only
unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.
9 They said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came in to sojourn,
and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with you, than with them.
And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.
10 But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them,
and shut to the door.
11 They smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness,
both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door.
12 The men said unto Lot, have you here any besides?
son in law, and your sons, and your daughters, and whatsoever you have in the city,
bring them out of this place:
13 For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face
of the LORD; and the LORD has sent us to destroy it.
14 Lot went out, and spoke unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said,
Up, get you out of this place; for the LORD will destroy this city.
But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law.
15 When the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take your wife,
and your two daughters, which are here; lest you be consumed in the iniquity of the
city.
16 While he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife,
and upon the hand of his two daughters; the LORD being merciful unto him: and they
brought him forth, and set him without the city.
17 When they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for your life;
look not behind you, neither stay you in all the plain;
escape to the mountain, lest you be consumed.
18 Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my LORD:
19 Behold now, your servant has found grace in your sight,
and you have magnified your mercy, which you have showed unto me in saving my life;
and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:
20 Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh,
let me escape there, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall live.
21 He said unto him, See, I have accepted you concerning this thing also,
that I will not overthrow this city, for the which you have spoken.
22 Haste you, escape there; for I cannot do anything till you be come there.
Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.
23 The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.
24 Then the LORD rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the LORD out
of heaven;
25 He overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities,
and that which grew upon the ground.
26 But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
27 Abraham went up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the LORD:
28 He looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld,
and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.
29 When God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham,
and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which
Lot lived.
30 Lot went up out of Zoar, and lived in the mountain, and his two daughters with him;
for he feared to live in Zoar: and he lived in a cave, he and his two daughters.
31 The firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old,
and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the
earth:
32 Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him,
that we may preserve seed of our father.
33 They made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in,
and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
34 On the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold,
I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also;
and go you in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
35 They made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose,
and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
36 Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.
37 The first born gave birth to a son, and called his name Moab: the same is the father
of the Moabites unto this day.
38 The younger, she also gave birth to a son, and called his name Benammi: the same is
the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.

Chapter 20

1 Abraham journeyed from there toward the south country,
and lived between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.
2 Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent,
and took Sarah.
3 But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold,
you are but a dead man, for the woman which you have taken; for she is a man’s wife.
4 But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, LORD,
will you kill also a righteous nation?
5 Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she herself said,
He is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done
this.
6 God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that you did this in the integrity of your
heart; for I also withheld you from sinning against me: therefore suffered I you not to
touch her.
7 Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for you,
and you shall live: and if you restore her not, know you that you shall surely die, you,
and all that are your.
8 Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants,
and told all these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid.
9 Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What have you done unto us?
and what have I offended you, that you have brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
you have done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.
10 Abimelech said unto Abraham, What saw you, that you have done this thing?
11 Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place;
and they will kill me for my wife’s sake.
12 Yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father,
but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.
13 When God caused me to wander from my father’s house, that I said unto her,
This is your kindness which you shall show unto me;
at every place where we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.
14 Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants,
and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.
15 Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before you: live where it pleases you.
16 Unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given your brother a thousand pieces of silver:
behold, he is to you a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with you,
and with all other: thus she was reproved.
17 So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife,
and his maidservants; and they gave birth to children.
18 For the LORD had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech,
because of Sarah Abraham’s wife.

Chapter 21

1 The LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did unto Sarah as he had
spoken.
2 For Sarah conceived, and gave birth to Abraham a son in his old age,
at the set time of which God had spoken to him.
3 Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him,
whom Sarah gave birth to him, Isaac.
4 Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded him.
5 Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him.
6 Sarah said, God has made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.
7 She said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck?
for I have born him a son in his old age.
8 The child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac
was weaned.
9 Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking.
10 Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of
this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.
11 The thing was very grievous in Abraham’s sight because of his son.
12 God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in your sight because of the lad,
and because of your bondwoman; in all that Sarah has said unto you,
hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall your seed be called.
13 Also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he is your seed.
14 Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water,
and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child,
and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
15 The water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.
16 She went, and sat her down over against him a good way off,
as it were a bow shot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the child.
And she sat over against him, and lifted up her voice, and wept.
17 God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven,
and said unto her, What troubles you, Hagar? fear not;
for God has heard the voice of the lad where he is.
18 Arise, lifted up the lad, and hold him in your hand;
for I will make him a great nation.
19 God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water;
and she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.
20 God was with the lad; and he grew, and lived in the wilderness,
and became an archer.
21 He lived in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him a wife out of the land of
Egypt.
22 At that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the chief captain of his host spoke unto
Abraham, saying, God is with you in all that you do:
23 Now therefore swear unto me here by God that you will not deal falsely with me,
nor with my son, nor with my son’s son: but according to the kindness that I have done
unto you, you shall do unto me, and to the land wherein you have sojourned.
24 Abraham said, I will swear.
25 Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water,
which Abimelech’s servants had violently taken away.
26 Abimelech said, I know not who has done this thing;
neither did you tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day.
27 Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech;
and both of them made a covenant.
28 Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
29 Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs which you have set by
themselves?
30 He said, For these seven ewe lambs shall you take of my hand,
that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this well.
31 Wherefore he called that place Beersheba; because there they swore both of them.
32 Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba: then Abimelech rose up,
and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the
Philistines.
33 Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the LORD,
the everlasting God.
34 Abraham sojourned in the Philistines’ land many days.

Chapter 22

1 After these things, God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said,
Behold, here I am.
2 He said, Take now your son, your only son Isaac, whom you love,
and get you into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of
the mountains which I will tell you of.
3 Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass,
and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son,
and held fast the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up,
and went unto the place of which God had told him.
4 Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.
5 Abraham said unto his young men, Abide you here with the ass;
and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.
6 Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son;
and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.
7 Isaac spoke unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I,
my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt
offering?
8 Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they
went both of them together.
9 They came to the place which God had told him of;
and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son,
and laid him on the altar upon the wood.
10 Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to kill his son.
11 The angel of the LORD called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham,
Abraham: and he said, Here am I.
12 He said, Lay not your hand upon the lad, neither do you any thing unto him: for now I
know that you fear God, seeing you have not withheld your son, your only son from me.
13 Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a
thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram,
and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.
14 Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day,
In the mount of the LORD it shall be seen.
15 The angel of the LORD called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,
16 Said, By myself have I sworn, says the LORD, for because you have done this thing,
and have not withheld your son, your only son:
17 That in blessing I will bless you, and in multiplying I will multiply your seed as the
stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore;
and your seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;
18 In your seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;
because you have obeyed my voice.
19 So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to
Beersheba; and Abraham lived at Beersheba.
20 After these things, it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah,
she has also born children unto your brother Nahor;
21 Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,
22 Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
23 Bethuel became the father of Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor,
Abraham’s brother.
24 His concubine, whose name was Reumah, she gave birth to also Tebah, and Gaham,
and Thahash, and Maachah.

Chapter 23

1 Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the years of the life
of Sarah.
2 Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham came
to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
3 Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spoke unto the sons of Heth, saying,
4 I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a burial place with
you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
5 The children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,
6 Hear us, my lord: you are a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres
bury your dead; none of us shall withhold from you his sepulchre,
but that you may bury your dead.
7 Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land,
even to the children of Heth.
8 He communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my
sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,
9 That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he has,
which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me
for a possession of a burial place amongst you.
10 Ephron lived among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in
the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city,
saying,
11 Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I you, and the cave that is therein,
I give it you; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it you: bury your
dead.
12 Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.
13 He spoke unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying,
But if you will give it, please, hear me: I will give you money for the field;
take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.
14 Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,
15 My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver;
what is that betwixt me and you? bury therefore your dead.
16 Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver,
which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver,
current money with the merchant.
17 The field of Ephron which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field,
and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field,
that were in all the borders round about, were made sure
18 Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth,
before all that went in at the gate of his city.
19 After this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before
Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan.
20 The field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession
of a burial place by the sons of Heth.

Chapter 24

1 Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all
things.
2 Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had,
Put, please, your hand under my thigh:
3 I will make you swear by the LORD, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth,
that you shall not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites,
among whom I live:
4 But you shall go unto my country, and to my kindred,
and take a wife unto my son Isaac.
5 The servant said unto him, perhaps the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this
land: must I needs bring your son again unto the land from where you came?
6 Abraham said unto him, Beware you that you bring not my son there again.
7 The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father’s house,
and from the land of my kindred, and which spoke unto me, and that swore unto me, saying,
Unto your seed will I give this land; he shall send his angel before you,
and you shall take a wife unto my son from there.
8 If the woman will not be willing to follow you, then you shall be clear from this my
oath: only bring not my son there again.
9 The servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master,
and swore to him concerning that matter.
10 The servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed;
for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia,
unto the city of Nahor.
11 He made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of
the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.
12 He said O LORD God of my master Abraham, please, send me good speed this day,
and show kindness unto my master Abraham.
13 Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city
come out to draw water:
14 Let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down your pitcher,
please, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink,
and I will give your camels drink also: let the same be she that you have appointed for
your servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that you have showed kindness unto my
master.
15 Before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel,
son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham’s brother,
with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
16 The damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin,
neither had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher,
and came up.
17 The servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, please,
drink a little water of your pitcher.
18 She said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand,
and gave him drink.
19 When she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for your camels also,
until they have done drinking.
20 She hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough,
and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.
21 The man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the LORD had made his journey
prosperous or not.
22 As the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel
weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;
23 Said, Whose daughter are you? tell me, please: is there room in your father’s house
for us to lodge in?
24 She said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah,
which she gave birth to unto Nahor.
25 She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough,
and room to lodge in.
26 The man bowed down his head, and worshipped the LORD.
27 He said, Blessed be the LORD God of my master Abraham,
who has not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way,
the LORD led me to the house of my master’s brethren.
28 The damsel ran, and told them of her mother’s house these things.
29 Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man,
unto the well.
30 When he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister’s hands,
and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spoke the man unto me;
that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.
31 He said, Come in, you blessed of the LORD; wherefore stand you without?
for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.
32 The man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels,
and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet,
and the men’s feet that were with him.
33 There was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat,
until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.
34 He said, I am Abraham’s servant.
35 The LORD has blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he has given him
flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels,
and asses.
36 Sarah my master’s wife gave birth to a son to my master when she was old: and unto him
has he given all that he has.
37 My master made me swear, saying, you shall not take a wife to my son of the daughters
of the Canaanites, in whose land I live:
38 But you shall go unto my father’s house, and to my kindred,
and take a wife unto my son.
39 I said unto my master, perhaps the woman will not follow me.
40 He said unto me, The LORD, before whom I walk, will send his angel with you,
and prosper your way; and you shall take a wife for my son of my kindred,
and of my father’s house:
41 Then shall you be clear from this my oath, when you come to my kindred;
and if they give not you one, you shall be clear from my oath.
42 I came this day unto the well, and said, O LORD God of my master Abraham,
if now you do prosper my way which I go:
43 Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass,
that when the virgin comes forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, please,
a little water of your pitcher to drink;
44 She say to me, Both drink you, and I will also draw for your camels: let the same be
the woman whom the LORD has appointed out for my master’s son.
45 Before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold,
Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder;
and she went down unto the well, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink,
please.
46 She made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink,
and I will give your camels drink also: so I drank,
and she made the camels drink also.
47 I asked her, and said, Whose daughter are you? And she said, the daughter of Bethuel,
Nahor’s son, whom Milcah gave birth to unto him: and I put the earring upon her face,
and the bracelets upon her hands.
48 I bowed down my head, and worshipped the LORD, and blessed the LORD God of my master
Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master’s brother’s daughter unto
his son.
49 Now if you will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me;
that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.
50 Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceeds from the LORD: we cannot
speak unto you bad or good.
51 Behold, Rebekah is before you, take her, and go,
and let her be your master’s son’s wife, as the LORD has spoken.
52 That, when Abraham’s servant heard their words, he worshipped the LORD,
bowing himself to the earth.
53 The servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and clothing,
and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious
things.
54 They did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and stayed all night;
and they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.
55 Her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days,
at the least ten; after that she shall go.
56 He said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the LORD has prospered my way;
send me away that I may go to my master.
57 They said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.
58 They called Rebekah, and said unto her, will you go with this man?
And she said, I will go.
59 They sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham’s servant,
and his men.
60 They blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, you are our sister,
be you the mother of thousands of millions, and let your seed possess the gate of those
which hate them.
61 Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels,
and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.
62 Isaac came from the way of the well Lahairoi; for he lived in the south country.
63 Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes,
and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.
64 Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel.
65 For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walks in the field to meet
us? And the servant had said, It is my master: therefore she took a vail,
and covered herself.
66 The servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
67 Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah’s tent, and took Rebekah,
and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother’s
death.

Chapter 25

1 Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.
2 She gave birth to him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak,
and Shuah.
3 Jokshan became the father of Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim,
and Letushim, and Leummim.
4 The sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldaah.
All these were the children of Keturah.
5 Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.
6 But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts,
and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward,
unto the east country.
7 These are the days of the years of Abraham’s life which he lived,
an hundred sixty and fifteen years.
8 Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man,
and full of years; and was gathered to his people.
9 His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah,
in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre;
10 The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried,
and Sarah his wife.
11 After the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac;
and Isaac lived by the well Lahairoi.
12 Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, whom Hagar the Egyptian,
Sarah’s handmaid, gave birth to unto Abraham:
13 These are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names,
according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth;
and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
14 Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
15 Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:
16 These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns,
and by their castles; twelve princes according to their nations.
17 These are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and
he gave up the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people.
18 They lived from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt,
as you go toward Assyria: and he died in the presence of all his brethren.
19 These are the generations of Isaac, Abraham’s son: Abraham became the father of
Isaac:
20 Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife,
the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram, the sister to Laban the Syrian.
21 Isaac intreated the LORD for his wife, because she was barren: and the LORD was
intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
22 The children struggled together within her; and she said, If it be so, why am I thus?
And she went to enquire of the LORD.
23 The LORD said unto her, Two nations are in your womb,
and two manner of people shall be separated from your bowels;
and the one people shall be stronger than the other people;
and the elder shall serve the younger.
24 When her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold,
there were twins in her womb.
25 The first came out red, all over like an hairy garment;
and they called his name Esau.
26 After that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau’s heel;
and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac was sixty years old when she gave birth to
them.
27 The boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field;
and Jacob was a plain man, living in tents.
28 Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob.
29 Jacob cooked pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he was faint:
30 Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, please, with that same red pottage;
for I am faint: therefore was his name called Edom.
31 Jacob said, Sell me this day your birthright.
32 Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do
to me?
33 Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he swore unto him: and he sold his birthright
unto Jacob.
34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles;
and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised his
birthright.

Chapter 26

1 There was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of
Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar.
2 The LORD appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt;
live in the land which I shall tell you of:
3 Sojourn in this land, and I will be with you, and will bless you;
for unto you, and unto your seed, I will give all these countries,
and I will perform the oath which I swore unto Abraham your father;
4 I will make your seed to multiply as the stars of heaven,
and will give unto your seed all these countries; and in your seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed;
5 Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes,
and my laws.
6 Isaac lived in Gerar:
7 The men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said,
She is my sister: for he feared to say, She is my wife;
lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah;
because she was fair to look upon.
8 When he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out
at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife.
9 Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she is your wife;
and how said you, She is my sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said,
Lest I die for her.
10 Abimelech said, What is this you have done unto us?
one of the people might lightly have lien with your wife,
and you should have brought guiltiness upon us.
11 Abimelech charged all his people, saying, He that touches this man or his wife shall
surely be put to death.
12 Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold: and the
LORD blessed him.
13 The man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great:
14 For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds,
and great store of servants: and the Philistines envied him.
15 For all the wells which his father’s servants had digged in the days of Abraham his
father, the Philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth.
16 Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for you are much mightier than we.
17 Isaac departed there, and pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar,
and lived there.
18 Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham
his father; for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham: and he
called their names after the names by which his father had called them.
19 Isaac’s servants digged in the valley, and found there a well of springing water.
20 The herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac’s herdmen, saying,
The water is ours: and he called the name of the well Esek;
because they strove with him.
21 They digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called the name of it
Sitnah.
22 He removed from there, and digged another well; and for that they strove not: and he
called the name of it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the LORD has made room for us,
and we shall be fruitful in the land.
23 He went up from there to Beersheba.
24 The LORD appeared unto him the same night, and said,
I am the God of Abraham your father: fear not, for I am with you, and will bless you,
and multiply your seed for my servant Abraham’s sake.
25 He built an altar there, and called upon the name of the LORD,
and pitched his tent there: and there Isaac’s servants digged a well.
26 Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends,
and Phichol the chief captain of his army.
27 Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come you to me, seeing you hate me,
and have sent me away from you?
28 They said, We saw certainly that the LORD was with you: and we said,
Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and you,
and let us make a covenant with you;
29 That you will do us no hurt, as we have not touched you,
and as we have done unto you nothing but good, and have sent you away in peace: you are
now the blessed of the LORD.
30 He made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.
31 They rose up betimes in the morning, and swore one to another: and Isaac sent them
away, and they departed from him in peace.
32 The same day, that Isaac’s servants came, and told him concerning the well which they
had digged, and said unto him, We have found water.
33 He called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is Beersheba unto this day.
34 Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the
Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite:
35 Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.

Chapter 27

1 That when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see,
he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son: and he said unto him, Behold,
here am I.
2 He said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death:
3 Now therefore take, please, your weapons, your quiver and your bow,
and go out to the field, and take me some venison;
4 Make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I may eat;
that my soul may bless you before I die.
5 Rebekah heard when Isaac spoke to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for
venison, and to bring it.
6 Rebekah spoke unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold,
I heard your father speak unto Esau your brother, saying,
7 Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat,
and bless you before the LORD before my death.
8 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I command you.
9 Go now to the flock, and fetch me from there two good kids of the goats;
and I will make them savoury meat for your father, such as he loves:
10 You shall bring it to your father, that he may eat,
and that he may bless you before his death.
11 Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man,
and I am a smooth man:
12 My father perhaps will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver;
and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.
13 His mother said unto him, Upon me be your curse, my son: only obey my voice,
and go fetch me them.
14 He went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and his mother made savoury
meat, such as his father loved.
15 Rebekah took goodly clothing of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in the house,
and put them upon Jacob her younger son:
16 She put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands,
and upon the smooth of his neck:
17 She gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared,
into the hand of her son Jacob.
18 He came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I;
who are you, my son?
19 Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau your first born;
I have done according as you commanded me: arise, please, sit and eat of my venison,
that your soul may bless me.
20 Isaac said unto his son, How is it that you have found it so quickly, my son?
And he said, Because the LORD your God brought it to me.
21 Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, please, that I may feel you, my son,
whether you be my very son Esau or not.
22 Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; and he felt him, and said,
The voice is Jacob’s voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.
23 He discerned him not, because his hands were hairy,
as his brother Esau’s hands: so he blessed him.
24 He said, are you my very son Esau? And he said, I am.
25 He said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son’s venison,
that my soul may bless you. And he brought it near to him,
and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank.
26 His father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me, my son.
27 He came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of his clothing,
and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the
LORD has blessed:
28 Therefore God give you of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth,
and plenty of corn and wine:
29 Let people serve you, and nations bow down to you: be lord over your brethren,
and let your mother’s sons bow down to you: cursed be every one that curses you,
and blessed be he that blesses you.
30 As soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob,
and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father,
that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
31 He also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father,
and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son’s venison,
that your soul may bless me.
32 Isaac his father said unto him, Who are you? And he said, I am your son,
your firstborn Esau.
33 Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? where is he that has taken venison,
and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before you came, and have blessed him?
yea, and he shall be blessed.
34 When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter
cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.
35 He said, your brother came with cunning, and has taken away your blessing.
36 He said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he has supplanted me these two times: he
took away my birthright; and, behold, now he has taken away my blessing.
And he said, have you not reserved a blessing for me?
37 Isaac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him your lord,
and all his brethren have I given to him for servants;
and with corn and wine have I sustained him: and what shall I do now unto you,
my son?
38 Esau said unto his father, have you but one blessing, my father?
bless me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept.
39 Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold,
your living shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above;
40 By your sword shall you live, and shall serve your brother;
and it shall come to pass when you shall have the dominion,
that you shall break his yoke from off your neck.
41 Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father blessed him: and Esau
said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand;
then will I kill my brother Jacob.
42 These words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she sent and called Jacob
her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, your brother Esau, as touching you,
does comfort himself, purposing to kill you.
43 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee you to Laban my brother to
Haran;
44 Stay with him a few days, until your brother’s fury turn away;
45 Until your brother’s anger turn away from you, and he forget that which you have done
to him: then I will send, and fetch you from there: why should I be deprived also of you
both in one day?
46 Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if
Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of
the land, what good shall my life do me?

Chapter 28

1 Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him,
you shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
2 Arise, go to Padanaram, to the house of Bethuel your mother’s father;
and take you a wife from there of the daughters of Laban your mother’s brother.
3 God Almighty bless you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you,
that you may be a multitude of people;
4 Give you the blessing of Abraham, to you, and to your seed with you;
that you may inherit the land wherein you are a stranger,
which God gave unto Abraham.
5 Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went to Padanaram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian,
the brother of Rebekah, Jacob’s and Esau’s mother.
6 When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to Padanaram,
to take him a wife from there; and that as he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying,
you shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan;
7 That Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to Padanaram;
8 Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father;
9 Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath the daughter
of Ishmael Abraham’s son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his wife.
10 Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.
11 He lighted upon a certain place, and stayed there all night, because the sun was set;
and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows,
and lay down in that place to sleep.
12 He dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth,
and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and
descending on it.
13 And, behold, the LORD stood above it, and said, I am the LORD God of Abraham your
father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon you lie, to you will I give it,
and to your seed;
14 Your seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and you shall spread abroad to the west,
and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in you and in your seed shall
all the families of the earth be blessed.
15 And, behold, I am with you, and will keep you in all places where you go,
and will bring you again into this land; for I will not leave you,
until I have done that which I have spoken to you of.
16 Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the LORD is in this place;
and I knew it not.
17 He was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place!
this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
18 Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his
pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
19 He called the name of that place Bethel: but the name of that city was called Luz at
the first.
20 Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me,
and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat,
and clothing to put on,
21 So that I come again to my father’s house in peace; then shall the LORD be my God:
22 This stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God’s house: and of all that you
shall give me I will surely give the tenth unto you.

Chapter 29

1 Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of the east.
2 He looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo,
there were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they watered the
flocks: and a great stone was upon the well’s mouth.
3 There were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the stone from the well’s mouth,
and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well’s mouth in his place.
4 Jacob said unto them, My brethren, where be you? And they said, Of Haran are we.
5 He said unto them, Know you Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We know him.
6 He said unto them, Is he well? And they said, He is well: and, behold,
Rachel his daughter comes with the sheep.
7 He said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered
together: water you the sheep, and go and feed them.
8 They said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together,
and till they roll the stone from the well’s mouth; then we water the sheep.
9 While he yet spoke with them, Rachel came with her father’s sheep;
for she kept them.
10 When Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother’s brother,
and the sheep of Laban his mother’s brother, that Jacob went near,
and rolled the stone from the well’s mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother’s
brother.
11 Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
12 Jacob told Rachel that he was her father’s brother,
and that he was Rebekah’s son: and she ran and told her father.
13 When Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his sister’s son, that he ran to meet him,
and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house.
And he told Laban all these things.
14 Laban said to him, Surely you are my bone and my flesh.
And he abode with him the space of a month.
15 Laban said unto Jacob, Because you are my brother,
should you therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall your wages be?
16 Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah,
and the name of the younger was Rachel.
17 Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well favoured.
18 Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve you seven years for Rachel your younger
daughter.
19 Laban said, It is better that I give her to you,
than that I should give her to another man: abide with me.
20 Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him but a few days,
for the love he had to her.
21 Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled,
that I may go in unto her.
22 Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
23 In the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to him;
and he went in unto her.
24 Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for a servant girl.
25 That in the morning, behold, it was Leah: and he said to Laban,
What is this you have done unto me? did not I serve with you for Rachel?
wherefore then have you deceived me?
26 Laban said, It must not be so done in our country,
to give the younger before the firstborn.
27 Fulfil her week, and we will give you this also for the service which you shall serve
with me yet seven other years.
28 Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife
also.
29 Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid.
30 He went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah,
and served with him yet seven other years.
31 When the LORD saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel was barren.
32 Leah conceived, and gave birth to a son, and she called his name Reuben: for she said,
Surely the LORD has looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.
33 She conceived again, and gave birth to a son; and said,
Because the LORD has heard I was hated, he has therefore given me this son also: and she
called his name Simeon.
34 She conceived again, and gave birth to a son; and said,
Now this time will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three sons:
therefore was his name called Levi.
35 She conceived again, and gave birth to a son: and she said,
Now will I praise the LORD: therefore she called his name Judah; and left bearing.

Chapter 30

1 When Rachel saw that she gave birth to Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister;
and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.
2 Jacob’s anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, Am I in God’s stead,
who has withheld from you the fruit of the womb?
3 She said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she shall bear upon my knees,
that I may also have children by her.
4 She gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in unto her.
5 Bilhah conceived, and gave birth to Jacob a son.
6 Rachel said, God has judged me, and has also heard my voice,
and has given me a son: therefore called she his name Dan.
7 Bilhah Rachel’s maid conceived again, and gave birth to Jacob a second son.
8 Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister,
and I have prevailed: and she called his name Naphtali.
9 When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her maid,
and gave her Jacob to wife.
10 Zilpah Leah’s maid gave birth to Jacob a son.
11 Leah said, A troop comes: and she called his name Gad.
12 Zilpah Leah’s maid gave birth to Jacob a second son.
13 Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed: and she called his name
Asher.
14 Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field,
and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, please,
of your son’s mandrakes.
15 She said unto her, Is it a small matter that you have taken my husband?
and would you take away my son’s mandrakes also? And Rachel said,
Therefore he shall lie with you to night for your son’s mandrakes.
16 Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said,
you must come in unto me; for surely I have hired you with my son’s mandrakes.
And he lay with her that night.
17 God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and gave birth to Jacob the fifth son.
18 Leah said, God has given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband: and
she called his name Issachar.
19 Leah conceived again, and gave birth to Jacob the sixth son.
20 Leah said, God has endued me with a good dowry; now will my husband live with me,
because I have born him six sons: and she called his name Zebulun.
21 Afterwards she gave birth to a daughter, and called her name Dinah.
22 God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb.
23 She conceived, and gave birth to a son; and said, God has taken away my reproach:
24 She called his name Joseph; and said, The LORD shall add to me another son.
25 When Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away,
that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country.
26 Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served you,
and let me go: for you know my service which I have done you.
27 Laban said unto him, please, if I have found favour in your eyes,
stay: for I have learned by experience that the LORD has blessed me for your sake.
28 He said, Appoint me your wages, and I will give it.
29 He said unto him, you know how I have served you, and how your cattle was with me.
30 For it was little which you had before I came, and it is now increased unto a
multitude; and the LORD has blessed you since my coming: and now when shall I provide for
mine own house also?
31 He said, What shall I give you? And Jacob said, you shall not give me any thing: if
you will do this thing for me, I will again feed and keep your flock.
32 I will pass through all your flock to day, removing from there all the speckled and
spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among the sheep,
and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and of such shall be my hire.
33 So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come,
when it shall come for my hire before your face: every one that is not speckled and
spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep,
that shall be counted stolen with me.
34 Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to your word.
35 He removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and spotted,
and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted,
and every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the sheep,
and gave them into the hand of his sons.
36 He set three days’ journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and Jacob fed the rest of
Laban’s flocks.
37 Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chestnut tree;
and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.
38 He set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering
troughs when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to
drink.
39 The flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle ringstraked, speckled,
and spotted.
40 Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstraked,
and all the brown in the flock of Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves,
and put them not unto Laban’s cattle.
41 Whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes
of the cattle in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.
42 But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the feebler were Laban’s,
and the stronger Jacob’s.
43 The man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and maidservants, and menservants,
and camels, and asses.

Chapter 31

1 He heard the words of Laban’s sons, saying, Jacob has taken away all that was our
father’s; and of that which was our father’s has he gotten all this glory.
2 Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold,
it was not toward him as before.
3 The LORD said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of your fathers, and to your kindred;
and I will be with you.
4 Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock,
5 Said unto them, I see your father’s countenance, that it is not toward me as before;
but the God of my father has been with me.
6 You know that with all my power I have served your father.
7 Your father has deceived me, and changed my wages ten times;
but God suffered him not to hurt me.
8 If he said thus, The speckled shall be your wages;
then all the cattle gave birth to speckled: and if he said thus,
The ringstraked shall be your hire; then gave birth to all the cattle ringstraked.
9 Thus God has taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me.
10 At the time that the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream,
and, behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled,
and grisled.
11 The angel of God spoke unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob: And I said, Here am I.
12 He said, lifted up now your eyes, and see, all the rams which leap upon the cattle are
ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have seen all that Laban does unto you.
13 I am the God of Bethel, where you anointed the pillar,
and where you vowed a vow unto me: now arise, get you out from this land,
and return unto the land of your kindred.
14 Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance
for us in our father’s house?
15 Are we not counted of him strangers? for he has sold us,
and has quite devoured also our money.
16 For all the riches which God has taken from our father, that is ours,
and our children’s: now then, whatsoever God has said unto you, do.
17 Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
18 He carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten,
the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in Padanaram,
for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.
19 Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the images that were her
father’s.
20 Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he told him not that he
fled.
21 So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the river,
and set his face toward the mount Gilead.
22 It was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.
23 He took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days’ journey;
and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.
24 God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him,
Take heed that you speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
25 Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount: and Laban with
his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.
26 Laban said to Jacob, What have you done, that you have stolen away unawares to me,
and carried away my daughters, as captives taken with the sword?
27 Wherefore did you flee away secretly, and steal away from me;
and did not tell me, that I might have sent you away with mirth, and with songs,
with tabret, and with harp?
28 Have not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters?
you have now done foolishly in so doing.
29 It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father spoke unto me
yesternight, saying, Take you heed that you speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
30 Now, though you would needs be gone, because you sore longed after your father’s
house, yet wherefore have you stolen my gods?
31 Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid: for I said,
perhaps you would take by force your daughters from me.
32 With whomsoever you find your gods, let him not live: before our brethren discern you
what is your with me, and take it to you. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen
them.
33 Laban went into Jacob’s tent, and into Leah’s tent,
and into the two maidservants’ tents; but he found them not.
Then went he out of Leah’s tent, and entered into Rachel’s tent.
34 Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel’s furniture,
and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent, but found them not.
35 She said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I cannot rise up before you;
for the custom of women is upon me. And he searched but found not the images.
36 Jacob was angry, and argued with Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban,
What is my trespass? what is my sin, that you have so hotly pursued after me?
37 Whereas you have searched all my goods, what have you found of all your household
goods? set it here before my brethren and your brethren,
that they may judge betwixt us both.
38 This twenty years have I been with you; your ewes and your she goats have not cast
their young, and the rams of your flock have I not eaten.
39 That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto you; I gave birth to the loss of it;
of my hand did you require it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by night.
40 Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night;
and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
41 Thus have I been twenty years in your house; I served you fourteen years for your two
daughters, and six years for your cattle: and you have changed my wages ten times.
42 Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac,
had been with me, surely you had sent me away now empty.
God has seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked you yesternight.
43 Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my daughters,
and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle,
and all that you see is mine: and what can I do this day unto these my daughters,
or unto their children which they have born?
44 Now therefore come you, let us make a covenant, I and you;
and let it be for a witness between me and you.
45 Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
46 Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took stones,
and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.
47 Laban called it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.
48 Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and you this day.
Therefore was the name of it called Galeed;
49 Mizpah; for he said, The LORD watch between me and you,
when we are absent one from another.
50 If you shall afflict my daughters, or if you shall take other wives beside my
daughters, no man is with us; see, God is witness betwixt me and you.
51 Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this pillar,
which I have cast betwixt me and you:
52 This heap be witness, and this pillar be witness,
that I will not pass over this heap to you, and that you shall not pass over this heap
and this pillar unto me, for harm.
53 The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge betwixt us.
And Jacob swore by the fear of his father Isaac.
54 Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread: and
they did eat bread, and stayed all night in the mount.
55 Early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters,
and blessed them: and Laban departed, and returned unto his place.

Chapter 32

1 Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
2 When Jacob saw them, he said, This is God’s host: and he called the name of that place
Mahanaim.
3 Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir,
the country of Edom.
4 He commanded them, saying, Thus shall you speak unto my lord Esau;
your servant Jacob says thus, I have sojourned with Laban,
and stayed there until now:
5 I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent to
tell my lord, that I may find grace in your sight.
6 The messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to your brother Esau,
and also he comes to meet you, and four hundred men with him.
7 Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the people that was with
him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands;
8 Said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it,
then the other company which is left shall escape.
9 Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac,
the LORD which said unto me, Return unto your country, and to your kindred,
and I will deal well with you:
10 I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth,
which you have showed unto your servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan;
and now I am become two bands.
11 Deliver me, please, from the hand of my brother,
from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me,
and the mother with the children.
12 You said, I will surely do you good, and make your seed as the sand of the sea,
which cannot be numbered for multitude.
13 He lodged there that same night; and took of that which came to his hand a present for
Esau his brother;
14 Two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams,
15 Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she asses,
and ten foals.
16 He delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves;
and said unto his servants, Pass over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and
drove.
17 He commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meets you, and asks you,
saying, Whose are you? and where go you? and whose are these before you?
18 Then you shall say, They be your servant Jacob’s;
it is a present sent unto my lord Esau: and, behold, also he is behind us.
19 So commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying,
On this manner shall you speak unto Esau, when you find him.
20 Say you moreover, Behold, your servant Jacob is behind us.
For he said, I will appease him with the present that goes before me,
and afterward I will see his face; perhaps he will accept of me.
21 So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that night in the company.
22 He rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two womenservants,
and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.
23 He took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over that he had.
24 Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the
day.
25 When he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh;
and the hollow of Jacob’s thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him.
26 He said, Let me go, for the day breaks. And he said, I will not let you go,
except you bless me.
27 He said unto him, What is your name? And he said, Jacob.
28 He said, your name shall be called no more Jacob,
but Israel: for as a prince have you power with God and with men, and have prevailed.
29 Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, please, your name.
And he said, Wherefore is it that you do ask after my name? And he blessed him there.
30 Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God face to face,
and my life is preserved.
31 As he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh.
32 Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank,
which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because he touched the hollow of
Jacob’s thigh in the sinew that shrank.

Chapter 33

1 Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau came,
and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel,
and unto the two handmaids.
2 He put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after,
and Rachel and Joseph hindmost.
3 He passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times,
until he came near to his brother.
4 Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him: and they wept.
5 He lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children;
and said, Who are those with you? And he said, The children which God has graciously
given your servant.
6 Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves.
7 Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and after came Joseph near
and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.
8 He said, What mean you by all this drove which I met?
And he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.
9 Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that you have unto yourself.
10 Jacob said, Nay, please, if now I have found grace in your sight,
then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have seen your face,
as though I had seen the face of God, and you were pleased with me.
11 Take, please, my blessing that is brought to you;
because God has dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough.
And he urged him, and he took it.
12 He said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go before you.
13 He said unto him, My lord knows that the children are tender,
and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men should overdrive them one
day, all the flock will die.
14 Let my lord, please, pass over before his servant: and I will lead on softly,
according as the cattle that goes before me and the children be able to endure,
until I come unto my lord unto Seir.
15 Esau said, Let me now leave with you some of the folk that are with me.
And he said, What needs it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord.
16 So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.
17 Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house,
and made booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called Succoth.
18 Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan,
when he came from Padanaram; and pitched his tent before the city.
19 He bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent,
at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem’s father,
for an hundred pieces of money.
20 He erected there an altar, and called it EleloheIsrael.

Chapter 34

1 Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she gave birth to unto Jacob,
went out to see the daughters of the land.
2 When Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her,
and lay with her, and defiled her.
3 His soul held fast unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel,
and spoke kindly unto the damsel.
4 Shechem spoke unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.
5 Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his cattle
in the field: and Jacob held his peace until they were come.
6 Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune with him.
7 The sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it: and the men were grieved,
and they were very angry, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob’s
daughter: which thing ought not to be done.
8 Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longs for for your
daughter: please give her him to wife.
9 Make you marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us,
and take our daughters unto you.
10 You shall live with us: and the land shall be before you;
live and trade you therein, and get you possessions therein.
11 Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me find grace in your eyes,
and what you shall say unto me I will give.
12 Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as you shall say unto
me: but give me the damsel to wife.
13 The sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, and said,
because he had defiled Dinah their sister:
14 They said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is
uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:
15 But in this will we consent unto you: If you will be as we be,
that every male of you be circumcised;
16 Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us,
and we will live with you, and we will become one people.
17 But if you will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised;
then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone.
18 Their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor’s son.
19 The young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had delight in Jacob’s
daughter: and he was more honourable than all the house of his father.
20 Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city,
and communed with the men of their city, saying,
21 These men are peaceable with us; therefore let them live in the land,
and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them;
let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters.
22 Only herein will the men consent unto us for to live with us, to be one people,
if every male among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised.
23 Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs be ours?
only let us consent unto them, and they will live with us.
24 Unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate of his
city; and every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city.
25 On the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi,
Dinah’s brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly,
and killed all the males.
26 They killed Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword,
and took Dinah out of Shechem’s house, and went out.
27 The sons of Jacob came upon the killed, and spoiled the city,
because they had defiled their sister.
28 They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses,
and that which was in the city, and that which was in the field,
29 All their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they captive,
and spoiled even all that was in the house.
30 Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, you have troubled me to make me to stink among the
inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and I being few in
number, they shall gather themselves together against me, and kill me;
and I shall be destroyed, I and my house.
31 They said, Should he deal with our sister as with a prostitute?

Chapter 35

1 God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and live there: and make there an altar
unto God, that appeared unto you when you fled from the face of Esau your brother.
2 Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him,
Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change your garments:
3 Let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an altar unto God,
who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went.
4 They gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand,
and all their earrings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which
was by Shechem.
5 They journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them,
and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.
6 So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is, Bethel,
he and all the people that were with him.
7 He built there an altar, and called the place Elbethel: because there God appeared unto
him, when he fled from the face of his brother.
8 But Deborah Rebekah’s nurse died, and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak: and
the name of it was called Allonbachuth.
9 God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padanaram, and blessed him.
10 God said unto him, your name is Jacob: your name shall not be called any more Jacob,
but Israel shall be your name: and he called his name Israel.
11 God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply;
a nation and a company of nations shall be of you, and kings shall come out of your
loins;
12 The land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to you I will give it,
and to your seed after you will I give the land.
13 God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.
14 Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him,
even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon,
and he poured oil thereon.
15 Jacob called the name of the place where God spoke with him, Bethel.
16 They journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a little way to come to Ephrath: and
Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.
17 When she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not;
you shall have this son also.
18 As her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name Benoni: but his
father called him Benjamin.
19 Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem.
20 Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of Rachel’s grave unto this
day.
21 Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar.
22 When Israel lived in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father’s
concubine: and Israel heard it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:
23 The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah,
and Issachar, and Zebulun:
24 The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and Benjamin:
25 The sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali:
26 The sons of Zilpah, Leah’s handmaid: Gad, and Asher: these are the sons of Jacob,
which were born to him in Padanaram.
27 Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city of Arbah, which is Hebron,
where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
28 The days of Isaac were an hundred and eighty years.
29 Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people,
being old and full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.

Chapter 36

1 Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom.
2 Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite,
and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite;
3 Bashemath Ishmael’s daughter, sister of Nebajoth.
4 Adah gave birth to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath gave birth to Reuel;
5 Aholibamah gave birth to Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah: these are the sons of Esau,
which were born unto him in the land of Canaan.
6 Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the persons of his house,
and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance,
which he had got in the land of Canaan; and went into the country from the face of his
brother Jacob.
7 For their riches were more than that they might live together;
and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.
8 Thus lived Esau in mount Seir: Esau is Edom.
9 These are the generations of Esau the father of the Edomites in mount Seir:
10 These are the names of Esau’s sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau,
Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of Esau.
11 The sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
12 Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau’s son; and she gave birth to Eliphaz Amalek: these
were the sons of Adah Esau’s wife.
13 These are the sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah,
and Mizzah: these were the sons of Bashemath Esau’s wife.
14 These were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon,
Esau’s wife: and she gave birth to Esau Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.
15 These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn son of Esau;
duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz,
16 Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek: these are the dukes that came of Eliphaz in
the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah.
17 These are the sons of Reuel Esau’s son; duke Nahath, duke Zerah, duke Shammah,
duke Mizzah: these are the dukes that came of Reuel in the land of Edom;
these are the sons of Bashemath Esau’s wife.
18 These are the sons of Aholibamah Esau’s wife; duke Jeush, duke Jaalam,
duke Korah: these were the dukes that came of Aholibamah the daughter of Anah,
Esau’s wife.
19 These are the sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their dukes.
20 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land;
Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,
21 Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan: these are the dukes of the Horites,
the children of Seir in the land of Edom.
22 The children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan’s sister was Timna.
23 The children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho,
and Onam.
24 These are the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this was that Anah that found
the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.
25 The children of Anah were these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah.
26 These are the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
27 The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
28 The children of Dishan are these; Uz, and Aran.
29 These are the dukes that came of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke Shobal, duke Zibeon,
duke Anah,
30 Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan: these are the dukes that came of Hori,
among their dukes in the land of Seir.
31 These are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom,
before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.
32 Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his city was Dinhabah.
33 Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
34 Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead.
35 Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab,
reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Avith.
36 Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
37 Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead.
38 Saul died, and Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
39 Baalhanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his
city was Pau; and his wife’s name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred,
the daughter of Mezahab.
40 These are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, according to their families,
after their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth,
41 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,
42 Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,
43 Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: these be the dukes of Edom,
according to their habitations in the land of their possession: he is Esau the father of
the Edomites.

Chapter 37

1 Jacob lived in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of Canaan.
2 These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old,
was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the sons of Bilhah,
and with the sons of Zilpah, his father’s wives: and Joseph brought unto his father their
evil report.
3 Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children,
because he was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours.
4 When his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren,
they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him.
5 Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they hated him yet the
more.
6 He said unto them, Hear, please, this dream which I have dreamed:
7 For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose,
and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about,
and made obeisance to my sheaf.
8 His brethren said to him, shall you indeed reign over us?
or shall you indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his
dreams, and for his words.
9 He dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, Behold,
I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made
obeisance to me.
10 He told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him,
and said unto him, What is this dream that you have dreamed?
Shall I and your mother and your brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to you to the
earth?
11 His brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying.
12 His brethren went to feed their father’s flock in Shechem.
13 Israel said unto Joseph, Do not your brethren feed the flock in Shechem?
come, and I will send you unto them. And he said to him, Here am I.
14 He said to him, Go, please, see whether it be well with your brethren,
and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of
Hebron, and he came to Shechem.
15 A certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field: and the man asked
him, saying, What seek you?
16 He said, I seek my brethren: tell me, please, where they feed their flocks.
17 The man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan.
And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan.
18 When they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them,
they conspired against him to kill him.
19 They said one to another, Behold, this dreamer comes.
20 Come now therefore, and let us kill him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say,
Some evil beast has devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams.
21 Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands;
and said, Let us not kill him.
22 Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the
wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands,
to deliver him to his father again.
23 When Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat,
his coat of many colours that was on him;
24 They took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty,
there was no water in it.
25 They sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold,
a company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and
myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.
26 Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we kill our brother,
and conceal his blood?
27 Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him;
for he is our brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content.
28 Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of
the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought
Joseph into Egypt.
29 Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph was not in the pit;
and he rent his clothes.
30 He returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not;
and I, where shall I go?
31 They took Joseph’s coat, and killed a kid of the goats,
and dipped the coat in the blood;
32 They sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their father;
and said, This have we found: know now whether it be your son’s coat or no.
33 He knew it, and said, It is my son’s coat; an evil beast has devoured him;
Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
34 Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins,
and mourned for his son many days.
35 All his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him;
but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my
son mourning. Thus his father wept for him.
36 The Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh’s,
and captain of the guard.

Chapter 38

1 At that time, that Judah went down from his brethren,
and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.
2 Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name was Shuah;
and he took her, and went in unto her.
3 She conceived, and gave birth to a son; and he called his name Er.
4 She conceived again, and gave birth to a son; and she called his name Onan.
5 She yet again conceived, and gave birth to a son;
and called his name Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she gave birth to him.
6 Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.
7 Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the LORD;
and the LORD killed him.
8 Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto your brother’s wife, and marry her,
and raise up seed to your brother.
9 Onan knew that the seed should not be his; When he went in unto his brother’s wife,
that he spilled it on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother.
10 The thing which he did displeased the LORD: wherefore he killed him also.
11 Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at your father’s house,
till Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest perhaps he die also, as his brethren did.
And Tamar went and lived in her father’s house.
12 In process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah’s wife died;
and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to Timnath,
he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.
13 It was told Tamar, saying, Behold your father in law goes up to Timnath to shear his
sheep.
14 She put her widow’s garments off from her, and covered her with a vail,
and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is by the way to Timnath;
for she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife.
15 When Judah saw her, he thought her to be a prostitute;
because she had covered her face.
16 He turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, please, let me come in unto you;
(for he knew not that she was his daughter in law.) And she said, What will you give me,
that you may come in unto me?
17 He said, I will send you a kid from the flock. And she said,
will you give me a pledge, till you send it?
18 He said, What pledge shall I give you? And she said, your signet, and your bracelets,
and your staff that is in your hand. And he gave it her, and came in unto her,
and she conceived by him.
19 She arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her,
and put on the garments of her widowhood.
20 Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite,
to receive his pledge from the woman’s hand: but he found her not.
21 Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the prostitute,
that was openly by the way side? And they said, There was no prostitute in this
place.
22 He returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her;
and also the men of the place said, that there was no prostitute in this place.
23 Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed: behold, I sent this kid,
and you have not found her.
24 About three months after, that it was told Judah, saying,
Tamar your daughter in law has played the prostitute;
and also, behold, she is with child by prostitution.
And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.
25 When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, By the man,
whose these are, am I with child: and she said, Discern, please, whose are these,
the signet, and bracelets, and staff.
26 Judah acknowledged them, and said, She has been more righteous than I;
because that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more.
27 In the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb.
28 When she travailed, that the one put out his hand: and the midwife took and bound upon
his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.
29 As he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she said,
How have you broken forth? this breach be upon you: therefore his name was called
Pharez.
30 Afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his
name was called Zarah.

Chapter 39

1 Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh,
captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of the Ishmeelites,
which had brought him down there.
2 The LORD was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man;
and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
3 His master saw that the LORD was with him, and that the LORD made all that he did to
prosper in his hand.
4 Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him overseer over his
house, and all that he had he put into his hand.
5 From the time that he had made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had,
that the LORD blessed the Egyptian’s house for Joseph’s sake;
and the blessing of the LORD was upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.
6 He left all that he had in Joseph’s hand; and he knew not ought he had,
save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was a goodly person, and well favoured.
7 After these things, his master’s wife cast her eyes upon Joseph;
and she said, Lie with me.
8 But he refused, and said unto his master’s wife, Behold,
my master knows not what is with me in the house, and he has committed all that he has to
my hand;
9 There is none greater in this house than I; neither has he kept back any thing from me
but you, because you are his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness,
and sin against God?
10 As she spoke to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her,
or to be with her.
11 About this time, that Joseph went into the house to do his business;
and there was none of the men of the house there within.
12 She caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her
hand, and fled, and got him out.
13 When she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth,
14 That she called unto the men of her house, and spoke unto them, saying, See,
he has brought in an Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me,
and I cried with a loud voice:
15 When he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me,
and fled, and got him out.
16 She laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.
17 She spoke unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant,
which you have brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me:
18 As I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled out.
19 When his master heard the words of his wife, which she spoke unto him, saying,
After this manner did your servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.
20 Joseph’s master took him, and put him into the prison,
a place where the king’s prisoners were bound: and he was there in the prison.
21 But the LORD was with Joseph, and showed him mercy,
and gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
22 The keeper of the prison committed to Joseph’s hand all the prisoners that were in the
prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it.
23 The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under his hand;
because the LORD was with him, and that which he did, the LORD made it to prosper.

Chapter 40

1 After these things, the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker had offended their
lord the king of Egypt.
2 Pharaoh was angry against two of his officers, against the chief of the butlers,
and against the chief of the bakers.
3 He put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison,
the place where Joseph was bound.
4 The captain of the guard charged Joseph with them,
and he served them: and they continued a season in ward.
5 They dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night,
each man according to the interpretation of his dream,
the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the prison.
6 Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them, and, behold,
they were sad.
7 He asked Pharaoh’s officers that were with him in the ward of his lord’s house, saying,
Wherefore look you so sadly to day?
8 They said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it.
And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations belong to God?
tell me them, please.
9 The chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold,
a vine was before me;
10 In the vine were three branches: and it was as though it budded,
and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes:
11 Pharaoh’s cup was in my hand: and I took the grapes,
and pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand.
12 Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it: The three branches are three
days:
13 Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lifted up your head,
and restore you unto your place: and you shall deliver Pharaoh’s cup into his hand,
after the former manner when you were his butler.
14 But think on me when it shall be well with you, and show kindness, please, unto me,
and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house:
15 For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done
nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.
16 When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph,
I also was in my dream, and, behold, I had three white baskets on my head:
17 In the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh;
and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.
18 Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation thereof: The three baskets are
three days:
19 Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lifted up your head from off you,
and shall hang you on a tree; and the birds shall eat your flesh from off you.
20 The third day, which was Pharaoh’s birthday, that he made a feast unto all his
servants: and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his
servants.
21 He restored the chief butler unto his butlership again;
and he gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand:
22 But he hanged the chief baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them.
23 Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgot him.

Chapter 41

1 At the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold,
he stood by the river.
2 And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed;
and they fed in a meadow.
3 And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river,
ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the
river.
4 The ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well favoured and fat kine.
So Pharaoh awoke.
5 He slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold,
seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.
6 And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them.
7 The seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears.
And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.
8 In the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the
magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream;
but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.
9 Then spoke the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day:
10 Pharaoh was angry with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard’s
house, both me and the chief baker:
11 We dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according to the
interpretation of his dream.
12 There was there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard;
and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams;
to each man according to his dream he did interpret.
13 As he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office,
and him he hanged.
14 Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon:
and he shaved himself, and changed his clothing, and came in unto Pharaoh.
15 Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream,
and there is none that can interpret it: and I have heard say of you,
that you can understand a dream to interpret it.
16 Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer of
peace.
17 Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river:
18 And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured;
and they fed in a meadow:
19 And, behold, seven other kine came up after them,
poor and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt
for badness:
20 The lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first seven fat kine:
21 When they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them;
but they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke.
22 I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good:
23 And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind,
sprung up after them:
24 The thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and I told this unto the magicians;
but there was none that could declare it to me.
25 Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God has showed Pharaoh what he
is about to do.
26 The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven years: the
dream is one.
27 The seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them are seven years;
and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.
28 This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is about to do he shows
unto Pharaoh.
29 Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt:
30 There shall arise after them seven years of famine;
and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt;
and the famine shall consume the land;
31 The plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following;
for it shall be very grievous.
32 For that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice;
it is because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.
33 Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise,
and set him over the land of Egypt.
34 Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land,
and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.
35 Let them gather all the food of those good years that come,
and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities.
36 That food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine,
which shall be in the land of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine.
37 The thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.
38 Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as this is,
a man in whom the Spirit of God is?
39 Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God has showed you all this,
there is none so discreet and wise as you are:
40 You shall be over my house, and according unto your word shall all my people be ruled:
only in the throne will I be greater than you.
41 Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set you over all the land of Egypt.
42 Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph’s hand,
and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;
43 He made him to ride in the second chariot which he had;
and they cried before him, Bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all the land of
Egypt.
44 Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without you shall no man lifted up his
hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.
45 Pharaoh called Joseph’s name Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the
daughter of Potipherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.
46 Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt.
And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of
Egypt.
47 In the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.
48 He gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt,
and laid up the food in the cities: the food of the field,
which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.
49 Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering;
for it was without number.
50 Unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came,
which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On gave birth to unto him.
51 Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh: For God, said he,
has made me forget all my toil, and all my father’s house.
52 The name of the second called he Ephraim: For God has caused me to be fruitful in the
land of my affliction.
53 The seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of Egypt, were ended.
54 The seven years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth
was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.
55 When all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and
Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he says to you, do.
56 The famine was over all the face of the earth: and Joseph opened all the storehouses,
and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.
57 All countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn;
because that the famine was so sore in all lands.

Chapter 42

1 Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons,
Why do you look one upon another?
2 He said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down there,
and buy for us from there; that we may live, and not die.
3 Joseph’s ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.
4 But Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren;
for he said, Lest perhaps mischief befall him.
5 The sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came: for the famine was in the
land of Canaan.
6 Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to all the people of the
land: and Joseph’s brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces
to the earth.
7 Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them,
and spoke roughly unto them; and he said unto them, where come you?
And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.
8 Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.
9 Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them,
you are spies; to see the nakedness of the land you are come.
10 They said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are your servants come.
11 We are all one man’s sons; we are true men, your servants are no spies.
12 He said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land you are come.
13 They said, your servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of
Canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.
14 Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spoke unto you, saying, you are spies:
15 Hereby you shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh you shall not go forth hence,
except your youngest brother come here.
16 Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and you shall be kept in prison,
that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: or else by the life of
Pharaoh surely you are spies.
17 He put them all together into ward three days.
18 Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; for I fear God:
19 If you be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go
you, carry corn for the famine of your houses:
20 But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified,
and you shall not die. And they did so.
21 They said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother,
in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear;
therefore is this distress come upon us.
22 Reuben answered them, saying, spoke I not unto you, saying,
Do not sin against the child; and you would not hear?
therefore, behold, also his blood is required.
23 They knew not that Joseph understood them; for he spoke unto them by an
interpreter.
24 He turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to them again,
and communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.
25 Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn,
and to restore every man’s money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way:
and thus did he unto them.
26 They laded their asses with the corn, and departed there.
27 As one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn,
he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack’s mouth.
28 He said unto his brethren, My money is restored;
and, lo, it is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid,
saying one to another, What is this that God has done unto us?
29 They came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan,
and told him all that befell unto them; saying,
30 The man, who is the lord of the land, spoke roughly to us,
and took us for spies of the country.
31 We said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies:
32 We be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not,
and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
33 The man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I know that you are true
men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and take food for the famine of your
households, and be gone:
34 Bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that you are no spies,
but that you are true men: so will I deliver you your brother,
and you shall traffick in the land.
35 As they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man’s bundle of money was in his
sack: and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.
36 Jacob their father said unto them, Me have you bereaved of my children: Joseph is not,
and Simeon is not, and you will take Benjamin away: all these things are against me.
37 Reuben spoke unto his father, saying, kill my two sons,
if I bring him not to you: deliver him into my hand,
and I will bring him to you again.
38 He said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead,
and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which you go,
then shall you bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

Chapter 43

1 The famine was sore in the land.
2 When they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt,
their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a little food.
3 Judah spoke unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying,
you shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.
4 If you will send our brother with us, we will go down and buy you food:
5 But if you will not send him, we will not go down: for the man said unto us,
you shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.
6 Israel said, Wherefore dealt you so ill with me, as to tell the man whether you had yet
a brother?
7 They said, The man asked us strictly of our state, and of our kindred, saying,
Is your father yet alive? have you another brother?
and we told him according to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he
would say, Bring your brother down?
8 Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go;
that we may live, and not die, both we, and you, and also our little ones.
9 I will be surety for him; of my hand shall you require him: if I bring him not unto
you, and set him before you, then let me bear the blame for ever:
10 For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second time.
11 Their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do this;
take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present,
a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds:
12 Take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth of
your sacks, carry it again in your hand; perhaps it was an oversight:
13 Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man:
14 God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother,
and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.
15 The men took that present, and they took double money in their hand and Benjamin;
and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.
16 When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house,
Bring these men home, and kill, and make ready; for these men shall dine with me at
noon.
17 The man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into Joseph’s house.
18 The men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph’s house;
and they said, Because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are
we brought in; that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us,
and take us for bondmen, and our asses.
19 They came near to the steward of Joseph’s house,
and they communed with him at the door of the house,
20 Said, O sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food:
21 When we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold,
every man’s money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we have
brought it again in our hand.
22 Other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we cannot tell who put our
money in our sacks.
23 He said, Peace be to you, fear not: your God, and the God of your father,
has given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money.
And he brought Simeon out unto them.
24 The man brought the men into Joseph’s house, and gave them water,
and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.
25 They made ready the present against Joseph came at noon: for they heard that they
should eat bread there.
26 When Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the
house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth.
27 He asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father well,
the old man of whom you spoke? Is he yet alive?
28 They answered, your servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive.
And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.
29 He lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother’s son, and said,
Is this your younger brother, of whom you spoke unto me?
And he said, God be gracious unto you, my son.
30 Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where to
weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there.
31 He washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread.
32 They set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians,
which did eat with him, by themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the
Hebrews; for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
33 They sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright,
and the youngest according to his youth: and the men marvelled one at another.
34 He took and sent messes unto them from before him: but Benjamin’s portion was five
times so much as any of theirs. And they drank, and were merry with him.

Chapter 44

1 He commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men’s sacks with food,
as much as they can carry, and put every man’s money in his sack’s mouth.
2 Put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack’s mouth of the youngest, and his corn money.
And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.
3 As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses.
4 When they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off, Joseph said unto his steward,
Up, follow after the men; and when you do overtake them, say unto them,
Wherefore have you rewarded evil for good?
5 Is not this it in which my lord drinks, and whereby indeed he divines?
you have done evil in so doing.
6 He overtook them, and he spoke unto them these same words.
7 They said unto him, Wherefore says my lord these words?
God forbid that your servants should do according to this thing:
8 Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks’ mouths,
we brought again unto you out of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal out of your
lord’s house silver or gold?
9 With whomsoever of your servants it be found, both let him die,
and we also will be my lord’s bondmen.
10 He said, Now also let it be according unto your words: he with whom it is found shall
be my servant; and you shall be blameless.
11 Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground,
and opened every man his sack.
12 He searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the cup was found
in Benjamin’s sack.
13 Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass,
and returned to the city.
14 Judah and his brethren came to Joseph’s house; for he was yet there: and they fell
before him on the ground.
15 Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that you have done?
know you not that such a man as I can certainly divine?
16 Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak?
or how shall we clear ourselves? God has found out the iniquity of your servants: behold,
we are my lord’s servants, both we, and he also with whom the cup is found.
17 He said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in whose hand the cup is found,
he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.
18 Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let your servant, please,
speak a word in my lord’s ears, and let not your anger burn against your servant: for you
are even as Pharaoh.
19 My lord asked his servants, saying, Have you a father, or a brother?
20 We said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age,
a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother,
and his father loves him.
21 You said unto your servants, Bring him down unto me,
that I may set mine eyes upon him.
22 We said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for if he should leave his
father, his father would die.
23 You said unto your servants, Except your youngest brother come down with you,
you shall see my face no more.
24 When we came up unto your servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.
25 Our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.
26 We said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us,
then will we go down: for we may not see the man’s face,
except our youngest brother be with us.
27 Your servant my father said unto us, you know that my wife gave birth to me two
sons:
28 The one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces;
and I saw him not since:
29 If you take this also from me, and mischief befall him,
you shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
30 Now therefore when I come to your servant my father, and the lad be not with us;
seeing that his life is bound up in the lad’s life;
31 It shall come to pass, when he sees that the lad is not with us,
that he will die: and your servants shall bring down the gray hairs of your servant our
father with sorrow to the grave.
32 For your servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying,
If I bring him not unto you, then I shall bear the blame to my father for ever.
33 Now therefore, please, let your servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord;
and let the lad go up with his brethren.
34 For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me?
lest perhaps I see the evil that shall come on my father.

Chapter 45

1 Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him;
and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no man with him,
while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.
2 He wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard.
3 Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; does my father yet live?
And his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence.
4 Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, please. And they came near.
And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt.
5 Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves,
that you sold me here: for God did send me before you to preserve life.
6 For these two years has the famine been in the land: and yet there are five years,
in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest.
7 God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth,
and to save your lives by a great deliverance.
8 So now it was not you that sent me here, but God: and he has made me a father to
Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.
9 Haste you, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus says your son Joseph,
God has made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, stay not:
10 You shall live in the land of Goshen, and you shall be near unto me, you,
and your children, and your children’s children, and your flocks, and your herds,
and all that you have:
11 There will I nourish you; for yet there are five years of famine;
lest you, and your household, and all that you have, come to poverty.
12 And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin,
that it is my mouth that speaks unto you.
13 You shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that you have seen;
and you shall haste and bring down my father here.
14 He fell upon his brother Benjamin’s neck, and wept;
and Benjamin wept upon his neck.
15 Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren
talked with him.
16 The fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh’s house, saying,
Joseph’s brethren are come: and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.
17 Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto your brethren, This do you;
lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan;
18 Take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I will give you the good
of the land of Egypt, and you shall eat the fat of the land.
19 Now you are commanded, this do you; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your
little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come.
20 Also regard not your goods; for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours.
21 The children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons,
according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way.
22 To all of them he gave each man changes of clothing;
but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of clothing.
23 To his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden with the good things of
Egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the
way.
24 So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them,
See that you fall not out by the way.
25 They went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their
father,
26 Told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt.
And Jacob’s heart fainted, for he believed them not.
27 They told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw
the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father
revived:
28 Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before I
die.

Chapter 46

1 Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beersheba,
and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.
2 God spoke unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob.
And he said, Here am I.
3 He said, I am God, the God of your father: fear not to go down into Egypt;
for I will there make of you a great nation:
4 I will go down with you into Egypt; and I will also surely bring you up again: and
Joseph shall put his hand upon your eyes.
5 Jacob rose up from Beersheba: and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father,
and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry
him.
6 They took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan,
and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him:
7 His sons, and his sons’ sons with him, his daughters, and his sons’ daughters,
and all his seed brought he with him into Egypt.
8 These are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt,
Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn.
9 The sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.
10 The sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar,
and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.
11 The sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
12 The sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez,
and Zarah: but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
And the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.
13 The sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron.
14 The sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
15 These be the sons of Leah, which she gave birth to unto Jacob in Padanaram,
with his daughter Dinah: all the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and
three.
16 The sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.
17 The sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah,
and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.
18 These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter,
and these she gave birth to unto Jacob, even sixteen souls.
19 The sons of Rachel Jacob’s wife; Joseph, and Benjamin.
20 Unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim,
which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On gave birth to unto him.
21 The sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi,
and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
22 These are the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all the souls were
fourteen.
23 The sons of Dan; Hushim.
24 The sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.
25 These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter,
and she gave birth to these unto Jacob: all the souls were seven.
26 All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins,
besides Jacob’s sons’ wives, all the souls were sixty and six;
27 The sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt,
were two souls: all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt,
were sixty and ten.
28 He sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto Goshen;
and they came into the land of Goshen.
29 Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen,
and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck,
and wept on his neck a good while.
30 Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen your face,
because you are yet alive.
31 Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father’s house, I will go up,
and show Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my father’s house,
which were in the land of Canaan, are come unto me;
32 The men are shepherds, for their trade has been to feed cattle;
and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.
33 It shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say,
What is your occupation?
34 That you shall say, your servants’ trade has been about cattle from our youth even
until now, both we, and also our fathers: that you may live in the land of Goshen;
for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.

Chapter 47

1 Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brethren,
and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have,
are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold, they are in the land of Goshen.
2 He took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.
3 Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation?
And they said unto Pharaoh, your servants are shepherds, both we,
and also our fathers.
4 They said morever unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come;
for your servants have no pasture for their flocks;
for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray you,
let your servants live in the land of Goshen.
5 Pharaoh spoke unto Joseph, saying, your father and your brethren are come unto you:
6 The land of Egypt is before you; in the best of the land make your father and brethren
to live; in the land of Goshen let them live: and if you know any men of activity among
them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
7 Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed
Pharaoh.
8 Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old are you?
9 Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and
thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been,
and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of
their pilgrimage.
10 Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.
11 Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of
Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
12 Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father’s household,
with bread, according to their families.
13 There was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore,
so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
14 Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt,
and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought: and Joseph brought the money
into Pharaoh’s house.
15 When money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan,
all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in
your presence? for the money fails.
16 Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if money fail.
17 They brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for
horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds,
and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year.
18 When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him,
We will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent;
my lord also has our herds of cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord,
but our bodies, and our lands:
19 Wherefore shall we die before your eyes, both we and our land?
buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and
give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that the land be not desolate.
20 Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh;
for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so
the land became Pharaoh’s.
21 As for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt even
to the other end thereof.
22 Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned
them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold
not their lands.
23 Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for
Pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and you shall sow the land.
24 It shall come to pass in the increase, that you shall give the fifth part unto
Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food,
and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones.
25 They said, you have saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord,
and we will be Pharaoh’s servants.
26 Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day,
that Pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the priests only,
which became not Pharaoh’s.
27 Israel lived in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen;
and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly.
28 Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years: so the whole age of Jacob was an
hundred forty and seven years.
29 The time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his son Joseph,
and said unto him, If now I have found grace in your sight, put, please,
your hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me;
bury me not, please, in Egypt:
30 But I will lie with my fathers, and you shall carry me out of Egypt,
and bury me in their burial place. And he said, I will do as you have said.
31 He said, Swear unto me. And he swore unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed’s
head.

Chapter 48

1 After these things, one told Joseph, Behold, your father is sick: and he took with him
his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
2 One told Jacob, and said, Behold, your son Joseph comes unto you: and Israel
strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.
3 Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan,
and blessed me,
4 Said unto me, Behold, I will make you fruitful, and multiply you,
and I will make of you a multitude of people; and will give this land to your seed after
you for an everlasting possession.
5 Now your two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto you in the land of Egypt
before I came unto you into Egypt, are mine; as Reuben and Simeon,
they shall be mine.
6 Your issue, which you becomes the father of after them, shall be your,
and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance.
7 As for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way,
when yet there was but a little way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the
way of Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem.
8 Israel beheld Joseph’s sons, and said, Who are these?
9 Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God has given me in this place.
And he said, Bring them, please, unto me, and I will bless them.
10 Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see.
And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them.
11 Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see your face: and, lo,
God has showed me also your seed.
12 Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to
the earth.
13 Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel’s left hand,
and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel’s right hand,
and brought them near unto him.
14 Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim’s head,
who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh’s head, guiding his hands wittingly;
for Manasseh was the firstborn.
15 He blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk,
the God which fed me all my life long unto this day,
16 The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads;
and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac;
and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.
17 When Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim,
it displeased him: and he held up his father’s hand,
to remove it from Ephraim’s head unto Manasseh’s head.
18 Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this is the firstborn;
put your right hand upon his head.
19 His father refused, and said, I know it, my son,
I know it: he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his
younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of
nations.
20 He blessed them that day, saying, In you shall Israel bless, saying,
God make you as Ephraim and as Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
21 Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be with you,
and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.
22 Moreover I have given to you one portion above your brethren,
which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.

Chapter 49

1 Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together,
that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days.
2 Gather yourselves together, and hear, you sons of Jacob;
and hearken unto Israel your father.
3 Reuben, you are my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength,
the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power:
4 Unstable as water, you shall not excel; because you went up to your father’s bed;
then defiled you it: he went up to my couch.
5 Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations.
6 O my soul, come not you into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour,
be not you united: for in their anger they killed a man,
and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.
7 Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath,
for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.
8 Judah, you are he whom your brethren shall praise: your hand shall be in the neck of
your enemies; your father’s children shall bow down before you.
9 Judah is a lion’s cub: from the prey, my son, you are gone up: he stooped down,
he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?
10 The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.
11 Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass’s colt unto the choice vine;
he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes:
12 His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk.
13 Zebulun shall live at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an haven of ships;
and his border shall be unto Zidon.
14 Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens:
15 He saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant;
and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.
16 Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
17 Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that bites the horse heels,
so that his rider shall fall backward.
18 I have waited for your salvation, O LORD.
19 Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last.
20 Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties.
21 Naphtali is a hind let loose: he gives goodly words.
22 Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well;
whose branches run over the wall:
23 The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:
24 But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands
of the mighty God of Jacob; (from there is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)
25 Even by the God of your father, who shall help you;
and by the Almighty, who shall bless you with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lies under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:
26 The blessings of your father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto
the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph,
and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.
27 Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey,
and at night he shall divide the spoil.
28 All these are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that their father spoke unto
them, and blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them.
29 He charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with
my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,
30 In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre,
in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a
possession of a burial place.
31 There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his
wife; and there I buried Leah.
32 The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of
Heth.
33 When Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons,
he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost,
and was gathered unto his people.

Chapter 50

1 Joseph fell upon his father’s face, and wept upon him, and kissed him.
2 Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians
embalmed Israel.
3 Forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days of those which are
embalmed: and the Egyptians mourned for him sixty and ten days.
4 When the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spoke unto the house of Pharaoh,
saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, please, in the ears of Pharaoh,
saying,
5 My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I have digged for me in
the land of Canaan, there shall you bury me. Now therefore let me go up, please,
and bury my father, and I will come again.
6 Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury your father, according as he made you swear.
7 Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh,
the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,
8 All the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father’s house: only their little
ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.
9 There went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very great company.
10 They came to the threshingfloor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan,
and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for
his father seven days.
11 When the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites,
saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning to the
Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called Abelmizraim, which is beyond Jordan.
12 His sons did unto him according as he commanded them:
13 For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan,
and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah,
which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a burial place of Ephron the
Hittite, before Mamre.
14 Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren,
and all that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father.
15 When Joseph’s brethren saw that their father was dead, they said,
Joseph will perhaps hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto
him.
16 They sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, your father did command before he died,
saying,
17 So shall you say unto Joseph, Forgive, please now, the trespass of your brethren,
and their sin; for they did unto you evil: and now, we pray you,
forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of your father.
And Joseph wept when they spoke unto him.
18 His brethren also went and fell down before his face;
and they said, Behold, we be your servants.
19 Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of God?
20 But as for you, you thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good,
to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.
21 Now therefore fear you not: I will nourish you, and your little ones.
And he comforted them, and spoke kindly unto them.
22 Joseph lived in Egypt, he, and his father’s house: and Joseph lived an hundred and ten
years.
23 Joseph saw Ephraim’s children of the third generation: the children also of Machir the
son of Manasseh were brought up upon Joseph’s knees.
24 Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely visit you,
and bring you out of this land unto the land which he swore to Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob.
25 Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you,
and you shall carry up my bones from hence.
26 So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him,
and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.