The Second Book of Moses: Called Exodus

Chapter 1

1 Now these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt;
every man and his household came with Jacob.
2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
3 Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
4 Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
5 All the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls: for Joseph was in
Egypt already.
6 Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.
7 The children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied,
and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with them.
8 Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.
9 He said unto his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel are more and
mightier than we:
10 Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that,
when there falls out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us,
and so get them up out of the land.
11 Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens.
And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses.
12 But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew.
And they were grieved because of the children of Israel.
13 The Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour:
14 They made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick,
and in all manner of service in the field: all their service,
wherein they made them serve, was with rigour.
15 The king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was
Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah:
16 He said, When you do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women,
and see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then you shall kill him: but if it be a
daughter, then she shall live.
17 But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them,
but saved the men children alive.
18 The king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them,
Why have you done this thing, and have saved the men children alive?
19 The midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian
women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.
20 Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied,
and waxed very mighty.
21 Because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.
22 Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born you shall cast into the
river, and every daughter you shall save alive.

Chapter 2

1 There went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi.
2 The woman conceived, and gave birth to a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly
child, she hid him three months.
3 When she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes,
and daubed it with bitumen and with pitch, and put the child therein;
and she laid it in the flags by the river’s brink.
4 His sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.
5 The daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river;
and her maidens walked along by the river’s side; and when she saw the ark among the
flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.
6 When she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept.
And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews’ children.
7 Then said his sister to Pharaoh’s daughter, Shall I go and call to you a nurse of the
Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for you?
8 Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child’s
mother.
9 Pharaoh’s daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me,
and I will give you your wages. And the woman took the child, and nursed it.
10 The child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son.
And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water.
11 In those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out unto his brethren,
and looked on their burdens: and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew,
one of his brethren.
12 He looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man,
he killed the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
13 When he went out the second day, behold, two men of the Hebrews strove together: and
he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smite you your fellow?
14 He said, Who made you a prince and a judge over us?
intend you to kill me, as you killedst the Egyptian?
And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known.
15 Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to kill Moses.
But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and lived in the land of Midian: and he sat down
by a well.
16 Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew water,
and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock.
17 The shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up and helped them,
and watered their flock.
18 When they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that you are come so soon to
day?
19 They said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds,
and also drew water enough for us, and watered the flock.
20 He said unto his daughters, And where is he? why is it that you have left the man?
call him, that he may eat bread.
21 Moses was content to live with the man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.
22 She gave birth to him a son, and he called his name Gershom: for he said,
I have been a stranger in a strange land.
23 In process of time, that the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel sighed by
reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the
bondage.
24 God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac,
and with Jacob.
25 God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto them.

Chapter 3

1 Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law,
the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert,
and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.
2 The angel of the LORD appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush:
and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
3 Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight,
why the bush is not burnt.
4 When the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of
the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.
5 He said, Draw not nigh here: put off your shoes from off your feet,
for the place whereon you stand is holy ground.
6 Moreover he said, I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.
7 The LORD said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt,
and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows;
8 I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians,
and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large,
unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites,
and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites,
and the Jebusites.
9 Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have
also seen the oppression with which the Egyptians oppress them.
10 Come now therefore, and I will send you unto Pharaoh,
that you may bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt.
11 Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh,
and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?
12 He said, Certainly I will be with you; and this shall be a token unto you,
that I have sent you: When you have brought forth the people out of Egypt,
you shall serve God upon this mountain.
13 Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel,
and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers has sent me unto you;
and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?
14 God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said,
Thus shall you say unto the children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you.
15 God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shall you say unto the children of Israel,
the LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
has sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all
generations.
16 Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them,
The LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob,
appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you,
and seen that which is done to you in Egypt:
17 I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites,
and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.
18 They shall hearken to your voice: and you shall come, you and the elders of Israel,
unto the king of Egypt, and you shall say unto him,
The LORD God of the Hebrews has met with us: and now let us go, we beseech you,
three days’ journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God.
19 I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand.
20 I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the
midst thereof: and after that he will let you go.
21 I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians: and it shall come to
pass, that, when you go, you shall not go empty.
22 But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that sojourns in her house,
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and clothing: and you shall put them upon your
sons, and upon your daughters; and you shall spoil the Egyptians.

Chapter 4

1 Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me,
nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The LORD has not appeared unto you.
2 The LORD said unto him, What is that in your hand? And he said, A rod.
3 He said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent;
and Moses fled from before it.
4 The LORD said unto Moses, Put forth your hand, and take it by the tail.
And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand:
5 That they may believe that the LORD God of their fathers, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has appeared unto you.
6 The LORD said furthermore unto him, Put now your hand into your bosom.
And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it out, behold,
his hand was leprous as snow.
7 He said, Put your hand into your bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom again;
and plucked it out of his bosom, and, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.
8 It shall come to pass, if they will not believe you,
neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the
latter sign.
9 It shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs,
neither hearken unto your voice, that you shall take of the water of the river,
and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which you take out of the river shall become
blood upon the dry land.
10 Moses said unto the LORD, O my LORD, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore,
nor since you have spoken unto your servant: but I am slow of speech,
and of a slow tongue.
11 The LORD said unto him, Who has made man’s mouth?
or who makes the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the LORD?
12 Now therefore go, and I will be with your mouth, and teach you what you shall say.
13 He said, O my LORD, send, please, by the hand of him whom you will send.
14 The anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses, and he said,
Is not Aaron the Levite your brother? I know that he can speak well.
And also, behold, he comes forth to meet you: and when he sees you,
he will be glad in his heart.
15 You shall speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I will be with your mouth,
and with his mouth, and will teach you what you shall do.
16 He shall be your spokesman unto the people: and he shall be,
even he shall be to you instead of a mouth, and you shall be to him instead of God.
17 You shall take this rod in your hand, with which you shall do signs.
18 Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said unto him, Let me go,
please, and return unto my brethren which are in Egypt,
and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.
19 The LORD said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead
which sought your life.
20 Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass,
and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in his hand.
21 The LORD said unto Moses, When you go to return into Egypt,
see that you do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in your hand: but I
will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.
22 You shall say unto Pharaoh, Thus says the LORD, Israel is my son,
even my firstborn:
23 I say unto you, Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if you refuse to let him go,
behold, I will kill your son, even your firstborn.
24 By the way in the inn, that the LORD met him, and sought to kill him.
25 Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son,
and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband are you to me.
26 So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband you are,
because of the circumcision.
27 The LORD said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.
And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him.
28 Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD who had sent him,
and all the signs which he had commanded him.
29 Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of
Israel:
30 Aaron spoke all the words which the LORD had spoken unto Moses,
and did the signs in the sight of the people.
31 The people believed: and when they heard that the LORD had visited the children of
Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction,
then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

Chapter 5

1 Afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus says the LORD God of Israel,
Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.
2 Pharaoh said, Who is the LORD, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go?
I know not the LORD, neither will I let Israel go.
3 They said, The God of the Hebrews has met with us: let us go, we pray you,
three days’ journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the LORD our God;
lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.
4 The king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do you, Moses and Aaron,
let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.
5 Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many,
and you make them rest from their burdens.
6 Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their officers,
saying,
7 You shall no more give the people straw to make brick,
as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for themselves.
8 The tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, you shall lay upon them;
you shall not diminish owed thereof: for they be idle;
therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.
9 Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein;
and let them not regard vain words.
10 The taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers,
and they spoke to the people, saying, Thus says Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.
11 Go you, get you straw where you can find it: yet not owed of your work shall be
diminished.
12 So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble
instead of straw.
13 The taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your daily tasks,
as when there was straw.
14 The officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them,
were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore have you not fulfilled your task in making brick
both yesterday and to day, as heretofore?
15 Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying,
Wherefore deal you thus with your servants?
16 There is no straw given unto your servants, and they say to us, Make brick: and,
behold, your servants are beaten; but the fault is in your own people.
17 But he said, you are idle, you are idle: therefore you say,
Let us go and do sacrifice to the LORD.
18 Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you,
yet shall you deliver the tale of bricks.
19 The officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in evil case,
after it was said, you shall not minish owed from your bricks of your daily task.
20 They met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh:
21 They said unto them, The LORD look upon you, and judge;
because you have made our savour to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh,
and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to kill us.
22 Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, LORD, wherefore have you so evil entreated
this people? why is it that you have sent me?
23 For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in your name, he has done evil to this people;
neither have you delivered your people at all.

Chapter 6

1 Then the LORD said unto Moses, Now shall you see what I will do to Pharaoh: for with a
strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his
land.
2 God spoke unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the LORD:
3 I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty,
but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.
4 I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan,
the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers.
5 I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel,
whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered my covenant.
6 Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the LORD,
and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians,
and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm,
and with great judgments:
7 I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God: and you shall know that
I am the LORD your God, which brings you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
8 I will bring you in unto the land, concerning which I did swear to give it to Abraham,
to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it you for an heritage: I am the LORD.
9 Moses spoke so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened not unto Moses for
anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.
10 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
11 Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of
his land.
12 Moses spoke before the LORD, saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened
unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?
13 The LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of
Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land
of Egypt.
14 These be the heads of their fathers’ houses: The sons of Reuben the firstborn of
Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these be the families of Reuben.
15 The sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar,
and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman: these are the families of Simeon.
16 These are the names of the sons of Levi according to their generations;
Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the life of Levi were an hundred thirty
and seven years.
17 The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their families.
18 The sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron,
and Uzziel: and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred thirty and three
years.
19 The sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these are the families of Levi according to
their generations.
20 Amram took him Jochebed his father’s sister to wife;
and she gave birth to him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram were an
hundred and thirty and seven years.
21 The sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.
22 The sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.
23 Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to wife;
and she gave birth to him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
24 The sons of Korah; Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these are the families of the
Korhites.
25 Eleazar Aaron’s son took him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife;
and she gave birth to him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of the Levites
according to their families.
26 These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the LORD said,
Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their armies.
27 These are they which spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt,
to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses and Aaron.
28 On the day when the LORD spoke unto Moses in the land of Egypt,
29 That the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying, I am the LORD: speak you unto Pharaoh king of
Egypt all that I say unto you.
30 Moses said before the LORD, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips,
and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?

Chapter 7

1 The LORD said unto Moses, See, I have made you a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron your brother
shall be your prophet.
2 You shall speak all that I command you: and Aaron your brother shall speak unto
Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of his land.
3 I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of
Egypt.
4 But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt,
and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of Israel,
out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.
5 The Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt,
and bring out the children of Israel from among them.
6 Moses and Aaron did as the LORD commanded them, so did they.
7 Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron eighty and three years old,
when they spoke unto Pharaoh.
8 The LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
9 When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, show a miracle for you: then you shall say
unto Aaron, Take your rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent.
10 Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the LORD had commanded: and
Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants,
and it became a serpent.
11 Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt,
they also did in like manner with their enchantments.
12 For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron’s rod
swallowed up their rods.
13 He hardened Pharaoh’s heart, that he hearkened not unto them;
as the LORD had said.
14 The LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh’s heart is hardened,
he refuses to let the people go.
15 Get you unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goes out unto the water;
and you shall stand by the river’s brink against he come;
and the rod which was turned to a serpent shall you take in your hand.
16 You shall say unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews has sent me unto you, saying,
Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold,
until now you would not hear.
17 Thus says the LORD, In this you shall know that I am the LORD: behold,
I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters which are in the river,
and they shall be turned to blood.
18 The fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall stink;
and the Egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the river.
19 The LORD spoke unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take your rod,
and stretch out your hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams,
upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of water,
that they may become blood; and that there may be blood throughout all the land of Egypt,
both in vessels of wood, and in vessels of stone.
20 Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD commanded; and he lifted up the rod,
and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh,
and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned
to blood.
21 The fish that was in the river died; and the river stank,
and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river;
and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.
22 The magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and Pharaoh’s heart was
hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the LORD had said.
23 Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also.
24 All the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink;
for they could not drink of the water of the river.
25 Seven days were fulfilled, after that the LORD had smitten the river.

Chapter 8

1 The LORD spoke unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus says the LORD,
Let my people go, that they may serve me.
2 If you refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all your borders with frogs:
3 The river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up and come into your
house, and into your bedchamber, and upon your bed, and into the house of your servants,
and upon your people, and into your ovens, and into your kneadingtroughs:
4 The frogs shall come up both on you, and upon your people,
and upon all your servants.
5 The LORD spoke unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth your hand with your rod over
the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the
land of Egypt.
6 Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt;
and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.
7 The magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of
Egypt.
8 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the LORD,
that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people;
and I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the LORD.
9 Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat for you,
and for your servants, and for your people, to destroy the frogs from you and your
houses, that they may remain in the river only?
10 He said, To morrow. And he said, Be it according to your word: that you may know that
there is none like unto the LORD our God.
11 The frogs shall depart from you, and from your houses, and from your servants,
and from your people; they shall remain in the river only.
12 Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto the LORD because of the
frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.
13 The LORD did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses,
out of the villages, and out of the fields.
14 They gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.
15 But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart,
and hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.
16 The LORD said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out your rod,
and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of
Egypt.
17 They did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod,
and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast;
all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
18 The magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice,
but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.
19 Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: and Pharaoh’s heart
was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.
20 The LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh;
lo, he comes forth to the water; and say unto him, Thus says the LORD, Let my people go,
that they may serve me.
21 Else, if you will not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies upon you,
and upon your servants, and upon your people, and into your houses: and the houses of the
Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.
22 I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people live,
that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end you may know that I am the LORD in the
midst of the earth.
23 I will put a division between my people and your people: to morrow shall this sign
be.
24 The LORD did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh,
and into his servants’ houses, and into all the land of Egypt: the land was corrupted by
reason of the swarm of flies.
25 Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go you,
sacrifice to your God in the land.
26 Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the
Egyptians to the LORD our God: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians
before their eyes, and will they not stone us?
27 We will go three days’ journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the LORD our God,
as he shall command us.
28 Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that you may sacrifice to the LORD your God in the
wilderness; only you shall not go very far away: intreat for me.
29 Moses said, Behold, I go out from you, and I will intreat the LORD that the swarms of
flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people,
to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to
sacrifice to the LORD.
30 Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.
31 The LORD did according to the word of Moses; and he removed the swarms of flies from
Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one.
32 Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go.

Chapter 9

1 Then the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him,
Thus says the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
2 For if you refuse to let them go, and will hold them still,
3 Behold, the hand of the LORD is upon your cattle which is in the field,
upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen,
and upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.
4 The LORD shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt: and there
shall nothing die of all that is the children’s of Israel.
5 The LORD appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the LORD shall do this thing in the
land.
6 The LORD did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died: but of the
cattle of the children of Israel died not one.
7 Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead.
And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go.
8 The LORD said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace,
and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.
9 It shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt,
and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast,
throughout all the land of Egypt.
10 They took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh;
and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking forth with blains
upon man, and upon beast.
11 The magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils;
for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.
12 The LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them;
as the LORD had spoken unto Moses.
13 The LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh,
and say unto him, Thus says the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go,
that they may serve me.
14 For I will at this time send all my plagues upon your heart, and upon your servants,
and upon your people; that you may know that there is none like me in all the earth.
15 For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite you and your people with
pestilence; and you shall be cut off from the earth.
16 In very deed for this cause have I raised you up, for to show in you my power;
and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.
17 As yet exalt you yourself against my people, that you will not let them go?
18 Behold, to morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail,
such as has not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof even until now.
19 Send therefore now, and gather your cattle, and all that you have in the field;
for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the field,
and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them,
and they shall die.
20 He that feared the word of the LORD among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants
and his cattle flee into the houses:
21 He that regarded not the word of the LORD left his servants and his cattle in the
field.
22 The LORD said unto Moses, Stretch forth your hand toward heaven,
that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and upon beast,
and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.
23 Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the LORD sent thunder and hail,
and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the LORD rained hail upon the land of
Egypt.
24 So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous,
such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
25 The hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field,
both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field,
and brake every tree of the field.
26 Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.
27 Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them,
I have sinned this time: the LORD is righteous, and I and my people are wicked.
28 Intreat the LORD (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail;
and I will let you go, and you shall stay no longer.
29 Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city,
I will spread abroad my hands unto the LORD; and the thunder shall cease,
neither shall there be any more hail; that you may know how that the earth is the
LORD’s.
30 But as for you and your servants, I know that you will not yet fear the LORD God.
31 The flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in the ear,
and the flax was bolled.
32 But the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not grown up.
33 Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto the LORD:
and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.
34 When Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased,
he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.
35 The heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the children of Israel go;
as the LORD had spoken by Moses.

Chapter 10

1 The LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh: for I have hardened his heart,
and the heart of his servants, that I might show these my signs before him:
2 That you may tell in the ears of your son, and of your son’s son,
what things I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them;
that you may know how that I am the LORD.
3 Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him,
Thus says the LORD God of the Hebrews, How long will you refuse to humble yourself before
me? let my people go, that they may serve me.
4 Else, if you refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will I bring the locusts
into your coast:
5 They shall cover the face of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and
they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped,
which remains unto you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which grows for you out of
the field:
6 They shall fill your houses, and the houses of all your servants,
and the houses of all the Egyptians; which neither your fathers,
nor your fathers’ fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth unto
this day. And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh.
7 Pharaoh’s servants said unto him, How long shall this man be a snare unto us?
let the men go, that they may serve the LORD their God: know you not yet that Egypt is
destroyed?
8 Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go,
serve the LORD your God: but who are they that shall go?
9 Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old,
with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go;
for we must hold a feast unto the LORD.
10 He said unto them, Let the LORD be so with you, as I will let you go,
and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.
11 Not so: go now you that are men, and serve the LORD; for that you did desire.
And they were driven out from Pharaoh’s presence.
12 The LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt for the
locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land,
even all that the hail has left.
13 Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt,
and the LORD brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that night;
and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.
14 The locust went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the regions of Egypt:
very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they,
neither after them shall be such.
15 For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened;
and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail
had left: and there remained not any green thing in the trees,
or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of Egypt.
16 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste;
and he said, I have sinned against the LORD your God, and against you.
17 Now therefore forgive, please, my sin only this once, and intreat the LORD your God,
that he may take away from me this death only.
18 He went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.
19 The LORD turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away the locusts,
and cast them into the Red sea; there remained not one locust in all the regions of
Egypt.
20 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel
go.
21 The LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out your hand toward heaven,
that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.
22 Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all
the land of Egypt three days:
23 They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but all the
children of Israel had light in their dwellings.
24 Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go you, serve the LORD;
only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones also go with you.
25 Moses said, you must give us also sacrifices and burnt offerings,
that we may sacrifice unto the LORD our God.
26 Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be left behind;
for thereof must we take to serve the LORD our God;
and we know not with what we must serve the LORD, until we come there.
27 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let them go.
28 Pharaoh said unto him, Get you from me, take heed to yourself, see my face no more;
for in that day you see my face you shall die.
29 Moses said, you have spoken well, I will see your face again no more.

Chapter 11

1 The LORD said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh,
and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let you go,
he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.
2 Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbour,
and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver and jewels of gold.
3 The LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians.
Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt,
in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants, and in the sight of the people.
4 Moses said, Thus says the LORD, About midnight will I go out into the midst of
Egypt:
5 All the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die,
from the first born of Pharaoh that sits upon his throne,
even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill;
and all the firstborn of beasts.
6 There shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt,
such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.
7 But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue,
against man or beast: that you may know how that the LORD does put a difference between
the Egyptians and Israel.
8 All these your servants shall come down unto me, and bow down themselves unto me,
saying, Get you out, and all the people that follow you: and after that I will go out.
And he went out from Pharaoh in a great anger.
9 The LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you;
that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.
10 Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh: and the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s
heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go out of his land.

Chapter 12

1 The LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt saying,
2 This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of
the year to you.
3 Speak you unto all the congregation of Israel, saying,
In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb,
according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house:
4 If the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his
house take it according to the number of the souls;
every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb.
5 Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: you shall take it out
from the sheep, or from the goats:
6 You shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly
of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.
7 They shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts and on the upper door
post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it.
8 They shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread;
and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.
9 Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire;
his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.
10 You shall let nothing of it remain until the morning;
and that which remains of it until the morning you shall burn with fire.
11 Thus shall you eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet,
and your staff in your hand; and you shall eat it in haste: it is the LORD’s
passover.
12 For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night,
and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast;
and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the LORD.
13 The blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where you are: and when I see
the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you,
when I smite the land of Egypt.
14 This day shall be unto you for a memorial; and you shall keep it a feast to the LORD
throughout your generations; you shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.
15 Seven days shall you eat unleavened bread; even the first day you shall put away
leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eats leavened bread from the first day until the
seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
16 In the first day there shall be an holy convocation,
and in the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you;
no manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat,
that only may be done of you.
17 You shall observe the feast of unleavened bread;
for in this selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt: therefore
shall you observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for ever.
18 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even,
you shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.
19 Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eats that
which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel,
whether he be a stranger, or born in the land.
20 You shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall you eat unleavened
bread.
21 Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them,
Draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and kill the passover.
22 You shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason,
and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the blood that is in the bason;
and none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.
23 For the LORD will pass through to smite the Egyptians;
and when he sees the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts,
the LORD will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your
houses to smite you.
24 You shall observe this thing for an ordinance to you and to your sons for ever.
25 It shall come to pass, when you be come to the land which the LORD will give you,
according as he has promised, that you shall keep this service.
26 It shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you,
What mean you by this service?
27 That you shall say, It is the sacrifice of the LORD’s passover,
who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt,
when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses.
And the people bowed the head and worshipped.
28 The children of Israel went away, and did as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron,
so did they.
29 That at midnight the LORD smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt,
from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive
that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.
30 Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians;
and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one
dead.
31 He called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up,
and get you forth from among my people, both you and the children of Israel;
and go, serve the LORD, as you have said.
32 Also take your flocks and your herds, as you have said, and be gone;
and bless me also.
33 The Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the land
in haste; for they said, We be all dead men.
34 The people took their dough before it was leavened,
their kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.
35 The children of Israel did according to the word of Moses;
and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold,
and clothing:
36 The LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians,
so that they lent unto them such things as they required.
And they spoiled the Egyptians.
37 The children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth,
about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children.
38 A mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds,
even very much cattle.
39 They baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt,
for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not stay,
neither had they prepared for themselves any victual.
40 Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who lived in Egypt,
was four hundred and thirty years.
41 At the end of the four hundred and thirty years,
even the selfsame day that all the hosts of the LORD went out from the land of Egypt.
42 It is a night to be much observed unto the LORD for bringing them out from the land of
Egypt: this is that night of the LORD to be observed of all the children of Israel in
their generations.
43 The LORD said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the passover: There shall
no stranger eat thereof:
44 But every man’s servant that is bought for money, when you have circumcised him,
then shall he eat thereof.
45 A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.
46 In one house shall it be eaten; you shall not carry forth owed of the flesh abroad out
of the house; neither shall you break a bone thereof.
47 All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.
48 When a stranger shall sojourn with you, and will keep the passover to the LORD,
let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it;
and he shall be as one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat
thereof.
49 One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourns among
you.
50 Thus did all the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses and Aaron,
so did they.
51 The selfsame day, that the LORD did bring the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt by their armies.

Chapter 13

1 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
2 Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever opens the womb among the children of
Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.
3 Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which you came out from Egypt,
out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand the LORD brought you out from this
place: there shall no leavened bread be eaten.
4 This day came you out in the month Abib.
5 It shall be when the LORD shall bring you into the land of the Canaanites,
and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites,
which he swore unto your fathers to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey,
that you shall keep this service in this month.
6 Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to
the LORD.
7 Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be seen
with you, neither shall there be leaven seen with you in all your quarters.
8 You shall show your son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the
LORD did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.
9 It shall be for a sign unto you upon your hand, and for a memorial between your eyes,
that the LORD’s law may be in your mouth: for with a strong hand has the LORD brought you
out of Egypt.
10 You shall therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to year.
11 It shall be when the LORD shall bring you into the land of the Canaanites,
as he swore unto you and to your fathers, and shall give it you,
12 That you shall set apart unto the LORD all that opens the matrix,
and every firstling that comes of a beast which you have;
the males shall be the LORD’s.
13 Every firstling of an ass you shall redeem with a lamb;
and if you will not redeem it, then you shall break his neck: and all the firstborn of
man among your children shall you redeem.
14 It shall be when your son asks you in time to come, saying, What is this?
that you shall say unto him, By strength of hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt,
from the house of bondage:
15 When Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the LORD killed all the firstborn in the
land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore I
sacrifice to the LORD all that opens the matrix, being males;
but all the firstborn of my children I redeem.
16 It shall be for a token upon your hand, and for frontlets between your eyes: for by
strength of hand the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt.
17 When Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the land
of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said,
Lest perhaps the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt:
18 But God led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea: and
the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.
19 Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had strictly sworn the children of
Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and you shall carry up my bones away hence
with you.
20 They took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham,
in the edge of the wilderness.
21 The LORD went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way;
and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night:
22 He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night,
from before the people.

Chapter 14

1 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
2 Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before Pihahiroth,
between Migdol and the sea, over against Baalzephon: before it shall you encamp by the
sea.
3 For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in the land,
the wilderness has shut them in.
4 I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, that he shall follow after them;
and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host;
that the Egyptians may know that I am the LORD. And they did so.
5 It was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of his
servants was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this,
that we have let Israel go from serving us?
6 He made ready his chariot, and took his people with him:
7 He took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt,
and captains over every one of them.
8 The LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt,
and he pursued after the children of Israel: and the children of Israel went out with an
high hand.
9 But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh,
and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea,
beside Pihahiroth, before Baalzephon.
10 When Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold,
the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel
cried out unto the LORD.
11 They said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt,
have you taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore have you dealt thus with us,
to carry us forth out of Egypt?
12 Is not this the word that we did tell you in Egypt, saying, Let us alone,
that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians,
than that we should die in the wilderness.
13 Moses said unto the people, Fear you not, stand still,
and see the salvation of the LORD, which he will show to you to day: for the Egyptians
whom you have seen to day, you shall see them again no more for ever.
14 The LORD shall fight for you, and you shall hold your peace.
15 The LORD said unto Moses, Wherefore cri you unto me?
speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward:
16 But lifted you up your rod, and stretch out your hand over the sea,
and divide it: and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the
sea.
17 I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians,
and they shall follow them: and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host,
upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
18 The Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I have gotten me honour upon
Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
19 The angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them;
and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them:
20 It came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel;
and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the
one came not near the other all the night.
21 Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the LORD caused the sea to go back by a
strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land,
and the waters were divided.
22 The children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the
waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
23 The Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of the sea,
even all Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.
24 That in the morning watch the LORD looked unto the host of the Egyptians through the
pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians,
25 Took off their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the Egyptians
said, Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the LORD fights for them against the
Egyptians.
26 The LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out your hand over the sea,
that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots,
and upon their horsemen.
27 Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength when
the morning appeared; and the Egyptians fled against it;
and the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
28 The waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen,
and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them;
there remained not so much as one of them.
29 But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea;
and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
30 Thus the LORD saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians;
and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore.
31 Israel saw that great work which the LORD did upon the Egyptians: and the people
feared the LORD, and believed the LORD, and his servant Moses.

Chapter 15

1 Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the LORD, and spoke, saying,
I will sing unto the LORD, for he has triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider has
he thrown into the sea.
2 The LORD is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he is my God,
and I will prepare him an habitation; my father’s God, and I will exalt him.
3 The LORD is a man of war: the LORD is his name.
4 Pharaoh’s chariots and his host has he cast into the sea: his chosen captains also are
drowned in the Red sea.
5 The depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a stone.
6 Your right hand, O LORD, is become glorious in power: your right hand, O LORD,
has dashed in pieces the enemy.
7 In the greatness of your excellency you have overthrown them that rose up against you:
you sent forth your wrath, which consumed them as stubble.
8 With the blast of your nostrils the waters were gathered together,
the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the
sea.
9 The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil;
my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword,
my hand shall destroy them.
10 You did blow with your wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty
waters.
11 Who is like unto you, O LORD, among the gods? who is like you, glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders?
12 You stretchedst out your right hand, the earth swallowed them.
13 You in your mercy have led forth the people which you have redeemed: you have guided
them in your strength unto your holy habitation.
14 The people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of
Palestina.
15 Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of Moab,
trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.
16 Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of your arm they shall be as
still as a stone; till your people pass over, O LORD, till the people pass over,
which you have purchased.
17 You shall bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of your inheritance,
in the place, O LORD, which you have made for you to live in, in the Sanctuary, O LORD,
which your hands have established.
18 The LORD shall reign for ever and ever.
19 For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea,
and the LORD brought again the waters of the sea upon them;
but the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea.
20 Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand;
and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
21 Miriam answered them, Sing you to the LORD, for he has triumphed gloriously;
the horse and his rider has he thrown into the sea.
22 So Moses brought Israel from the Red sea, and they went out into the wilderness of
Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.
23 When they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah,
for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called Marah.
24 The people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
25 He cried unto the LORD; and the LORD showed him a tree,
which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet: there he made for
them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them,
26 Said, If you will diligently hearken to the voice of the LORD your God,
and will do that which is right in his sight, and will give ear to his commandments,
and keep all his statutes, I will put none of these diseases upon you,
which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the LORD that heals you.
27 They came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water,
and sixty and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.

Chapter 16

1 They took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation of the children of Israel
came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai,
on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of
Egypt.
2 The whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in
the wilderness:
3 The children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the LORD
in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots,
and when we did eat bread to the full; for you have brought us forth into this
wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.
4 Then said the LORD unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you;
and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them,
whether they will walk in my law, or no.
5 It shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring
in; and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
6 Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even,
then you shall know that the LORD has brought you out from the land of Egypt:
7 In the morning, then you shall see the glory of the LORD;
for that he hears your murmurings against the LORD: and what are we,
that you murmur against us?
8 Moses said, This shall be, when the LORD shall give you in the evening flesh to eat,
and in the morning bread to the full; for that the LORD hears your murmurings which you
murmur against him: and what are we? your murmurings are not against us,
but against the LORD.
9 Moses spoke unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel,
Come near before the LORD: for he has heard your murmurings.
10 As Aaron spoke unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel,
that they looked toward the wilderness, and, behold,
the glory of the LORD appeared in the cloud.
11 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
12 I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel: speak unto them, saying,
At even you shall eat flesh, and in the morning you shall be filled with bread;
and you shall know that I am the LORD your God.
13 That at even the quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay
round about the host.
14 When the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a
small round thing, as small as the hoar frost on the ground.
15 When the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another,
It is manna: for they knew not what it was. And Moses said unto them,
This is the bread which the LORD has given you to eat.
16 This is the thing which the LORD has commanded, Gather of it every man according to
his eating, an omer for every man, according to the number of your persons;
take you every man for them which are in his tents.
17 The children of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some less.
18 When they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over,
and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his
eating.
19 Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.
20 Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the
morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses was angry with them.
21 They gathered it every morning, every man according to his eating: and when the sun
waxed hot, it melted.
22 That on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread,
two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
23 He said unto them, This is that which the LORD has said,
To morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the LORD: bake that which you will bake to
day, and cooked that you will cooked; and that which remains over lay up for you to be
kept until the morning.
24 They laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade: and it did not stink,
neither was there any worm therein.
25 Moses said, Eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto the LORD: to day you shall
not find it in the field.
26 Six days you shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is the sabbath,
in it there shall be none.
27 That there went out some of the people on the seventh day for to gather,
and they found none.
28 The LORD said unto Moses, How long refuse you to keep my commandments and my laws?
29 See, for that the LORD has given you the sabbath,
therefore he gives you on the sixth day the bread of two days;
abide you every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.
30 So the people rested on the seventh day.
31 The house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it was like coriander seed,
white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.
32 Moses said, This is the thing which the LORD commands,
Fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations;
that they may see the bread with which I have fed you in the wilderness,
when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
33 Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omer full of manna therein,
and lay it up before the LORD, to be kept for your generations.
34 As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.
35 The children of Israel did eat manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited;
they did eat manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.
36 Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

Chapter 17

1 All the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin,
after their journeys, according to the commandment of the LORD,
and pitched in Rephidim: and there was no water for the people to drink.
2 Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink.
And Moses said unto them, Why chide you with me? wherefore do you tempt the LORD?
3 The people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said,
Wherefore is this that you have brought us up out of Egypt,
to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?
4 Moses cried unto the LORD, saying, What shall I do unto this people?
they be almost ready to stone me.
5 The LORD said unto Moses, Go on before the people,
and take with you of the elders of Israel; and your rod, with which you smote the river,
take in your hand, and go.
6 Behold, I will stand before you there upon the rock in Horeb;
and you shall smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it,
that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.
7 He called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah,
because of the arguing of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the LORD,
saying, Is the LORD among us, or not?
8 Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
9 Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out,
fight with Amalek: to morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in
mine hand.
10 So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron,
and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
11 When Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand,
Amalek prevailed.
12 But Moses’ hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him,
and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side,
and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the
sun.
13 Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
14 The LORD said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book,
and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put out the remembrance of
Amalek from under heaven.
15 Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovahnissi:
16 For he said, Because the LORD has sworn that the LORD will have war with Amalek from
generation to generation.

Chapter 18

1 When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’ father in law,
heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people,
and that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt;
2 Then Jethro, Moses’ father in law, took Zipporah, Moses’ wife,
after he had sent her back,
3 Her two sons; of which the name of the one was Gershom;
for he said, I have been an alien in a strange land:
4 The name of the other was Eliezer; for the God of my father, said he, was mine help,
and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh:
5 Jethro, Moses’ father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the
wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of God:
6 He said unto Moses, I your father in law Jethro am come unto you, and your wife,
and her two sons with her.
7 Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance, and kissed him;
and they asked each other of their welfare; and they came into the tent.
8 Moses told his father in law all that the LORD had done unto Pharaoh and to the
Egyptians for Israel’s sake, and all the travail that had come upon them by the way,
and how the LORD delivered them.
9 Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the LORD had done to Israel,
whom he had delivered out of the hand of the Egyptians.
10 Jethro said, Blessed be the LORD, who has delivered you out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who has delivered the people from under the
hand of the Egyptians.
11 Now I know that the LORD is greater than all gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt
proudly he was above them.
12 Jethro, Moses’ father in law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron
came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses’ father in law before
God.
13 On the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses from
the morning unto the evening.
14 When Moses’ father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said,
What is this thing that you do to the people? why sitt you yourself alone,
and all the people stand by you from morning unto even?
15 Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to enquire of
God:
16 When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and another,
and I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.
17 Moses’ father in law said unto him, The thing that you do is not good.
18 You will surely wear away, both you, and this people that is with you: for this thing
is too heavy for you; you are not able to perform it yourself alone.
19 Hearken now unto my voice, I will give you counsel,
and God shall be with you: Be you for the people to God-ward,
that you may bring the causes unto God:
20 You shall teach them ordinances and laws, and shall show them the way wherein they
must walk, and the work that they must do.
21 Moreover you shall provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God,
men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands,
and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens:
22 Let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be,
that every great matter they shall bring unto you, but every small matter they shall
judge: so shall it be easier for yourself, and they shall bear the burden with you.
23 If you shall do this thing, and God command you so, then you shall be able to endure,
and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.
24 So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law,
and did all that he had said.
25 Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people,
rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
26 They judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses,
but every small matter they judged themselves.
27 Moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into his own land.

Chapter 19

1 In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of
Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai.
2 For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai,
and had pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped before the mount.
3 Moses went up unto God, and the LORD called unto him out of the mountain, saying,
Thus shall you say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel;
4 You have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I gave birth to you on eagles’
wings, and brought you unto myself.
5 Now therefore, if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant,
then you shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is
mine:
6 You shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.
These are the words which you shall speak unto the children of Israel.
7 Moses came and called for the elders of the people,
and laid before their faces all these words which the LORD commanded him.
8 All the people answered together, and said, All that the LORD has spoken we will do.
And Moses returned the words of the people unto the LORD.
9 The LORD said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto you in a thick cloud,
that the people may hear when I speak with you, and believe you for ever.
And Moses told the words of the people unto the LORD.
10 The LORD said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to morrow,
and let them wash their clothes,
11 Be ready against the third day: for the third day the LORD will come down in the sight
of all the people upon mount Sinai.
12 You shall set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves,
that you go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever touches the mount
shall be surely put to death:
13 There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through;
whether it be beast or man, it shall not live: when the trumpet sounds long,
they shall come up to the mount.
14 Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people;
and they washed their clothes.
15 He said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come not at your wives.
16 On the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings,
and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud;
so that all the people that was in the camp trembled.
17 Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God;
and they stood at the nether part of the mount.
18 Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the LORD descended upon it in fire: and
the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace,
and the whole mount quaked greatly.
19 When the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spoke,
and God answered him by a voice.
20 The LORD came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the LORD called
Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up.
21 The LORD said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people,
lest they break through unto the LORD to gaze, and many of them perish.
22 Let the priests also, which come near to the LORD, sanctify themselves,
lest the LORD break forth upon them.
23 Moses said unto the LORD, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai: for you chargedst
us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.
24 The LORD said unto him, Away, get you down, and you shall come up, you,
and Aaron with you: but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto
the LORD, lest he break forth upon them.
25 So Moses went down unto the people, and spoke unto them.

Chapter 20

1 God spoke all these words, saying,
2 I am the LORD your God, which have brought you out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of bondage.
3 You shall have no other gods before me.
4 You shall not make unto you any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in
heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the
earth.
5 You shall not bow down yourself to them, nor serve them: for I the LORD your God am a
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me;
6 Shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.
7 You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain;
for the LORD will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.
8 Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.
9 Six days shall you labour, and do all your work:
10 But the seventh day is the sabbath of the LORD your God: in it you shall not do any
work, you, nor your son, nor your daughter, your manservant, nor your maidservant,
nor your cattle, nor your stranger that is within your gates:
11 For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is,
and rested the seventh day: wherefore the LORD blessed the sabbath day,
and hallowed it.
12 Honour your father and your mother: that your days may be long upon the land which the
LORD your God gives you.
13 You shall not kill.
14 You shall not commit adultery.
15 You shall not steal.
16 You shall not bear false witness against your neighbour.
17 You shall not covet your neighbour’s house, you shall not covet your neighbour’s wife,
nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass,
nor any thing that is your neighbour’s.
18 All the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet,
and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed,
and stood afar off.
19 They said unto Moses, Speak you with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with
us, lest we die.
20 Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you,
and that his fear may be before your faces, that you sin not.
21 The people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God
was.
22 The LORD said unto Moses, Thus you shall say unto the children of Israel,
you have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.
23 You shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall you make unto you gods of
gold.
24 An altar of earth you shall make unto me, and shall sacrifice thereon your burnt
offerings, and your peace offerings, your sheep, and your oxen: in all places where I
record my name I will come unto you, and I will bless you.
25 If you will make me an altar of stone, you shall not build it of hewn stone: for if
you lifted up your tool upon it, you have polluted it.
26 Neither shall you go up by steps unto mine altar,
that your nakedness be not discovered thereon.

Chapter 21

1 Now these are the judgments which you shall set before them.
2 If you buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go
out free for nothing.
3 If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married,
then his wife shall go out with him.
4 If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters;
the wife and her children shall be her master’s, and he shall go out by himself.
5 If the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children;
I will not go out free:
6 Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door,
or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul;
and he shall serve him for ever.
7 If a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the menservants
do.
8 If she please not her master, who has betrothed her to himself,
then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no
power, seeing he has dealt deceitfully with her.
9 If he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of
daughters.
10 If he take him another wife; her food, her clothing, and her duty of marriage,
shall he not diminish.
11 If he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money.
12 He that smites a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.
13 If a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand;
then I will appoint you a place where he shall flee.
14 But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to kill him with guile;
you shall take him from mine altar, that he may die.
15 He that smites his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death.
16 He that steals a man, and sells him, or if he be found in his hand,
he shall surely be put to death.
17 He that curses his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death.
18 If men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or with his fist,
and he die not, but keeps his bed:
19 If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff,
then shall he that smote him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time,
and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.
20 If a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand;
he shall be surely punished.
21 Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished: for he is his
money.
22 If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her,
and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished,
according as the woman’s husband will lay upon him;
and he shall pay as the judges determine.
23 If any mischief follow, then you shall give life for life,
24 Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
25 Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
26 If a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish;
he shall let him go free for his eye’s sake.
27 If he smite out his manservant’s tooth, or his maidservant’s tooth;
he shall let him go free for his tooth’s sake.
28 If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned,
and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit.
29 But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past,
and it has been testified to his owner, and he has not kept him in,
but that he has killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned,
and his owner also shall be put to death.
30 If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life
whatsoever is laid upon him.
31 Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter,
according to this judgment shall it be done unto him.
32 If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant;
he shall give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.
33 If a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and not cover it,
and an ox or an ass fall therein;
34 The owner of the pit shall make it good, and give money unto the owner of them;
and the dead beast shall be his.
35 If one man’s ox hurt another’s, that he die; then they shall sell the live ox,
and divide the money of it; and the dead ox also they shall divide.
36 Or if it be known that the ox has used to push in time past,
and his owner has not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox;
and the dead shall be his own.

Chapter 22

1 If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it;
he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.
2 If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die,
there shall no blood be shed for him.
3 If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him;
for he should make full restitution; if he have nothing,
then he shall be sold for his theft.
4 If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep;
he shall restore double.
5 If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast,
and shall feed in another man’s field; of the best of his own field,
and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make restitution.
6 If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn,
or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith;
he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.
7 If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or goods to keep,
and it be stolen out of the man’s house; if the thief be found, let him pay double.
8 If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be brought unto the
judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his neighbour’s goods.
9 For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for clothing,
or for any manner of lost thing which another challenges to be his,
the cause of both parties shall come before the judges;
and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour.
10 If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast,
to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it:
11 Then shall an oath of the LORD be between them both,
that he has not put his hand unto his neighbour’s goods;
and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good.
12 If it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.
13 If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness,
and he shall not make good that which was torn.
14 If a man borrow owed of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die,
the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it good.
15 But if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good: if it be an hired
thing, it came for his hire.
16 If a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her,
he shall surely endow her to be his wife.
17 If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him,
he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.
18 You shall not suffer a witch to live.
19 Whosoever lies with a beast shall surely be put to death.
20 He that sacrifices unto any god, save unto the LORD only,
he shall be utterly destroyed.
21 You shall neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for you were strangers in the land
of Egypt.
22 You shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.
23 If you afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me,
I will surely hear their cry;
24 My wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword;
and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.
25 If you lend money to any of my people that is poor by you,
you shall not be to him as an usurer, neither shall you lay upon him usury.
26 If you at all take your neighbour’s clothing to pledge,
you shall deliver it unto him by that the sun goes down:
27 For that is his covering only, it is his clothing for his skin: wherein shall he
sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he cries unto me, that I will hear;
for I am gracious.
28 You shall not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of your people.
29 You shall not delay to offer the first of your ripe fruits,
and of your liquors: the firstborn of your sons shall you give unto me.
30 Likewise shall you do with your oxen, and with your sheep: seven days it shall be with
his dam; on the eighth day you shall give it me.
31 You shall be holy men unto me: neither shall you eat any flesh that is torn of beasts
in the field; you shall cast it to the dogs.

Chapter 23

1 You shall not raise a false report: put not your hand with the wicked to be an
unrighteous witness.
2 You shall not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shall you speak in a cause to
decline after many to wr judgment:
3 Neither shall you countenance a poor man in his cause.
4 If you meet your enemy’s ox or his ass going astray,
you shall surely bring it back to him again.
5 If you see the ass of him that hates you lying under his burden,
and would forbear to help him, you shall surely help with him.
6 You shall not wr the judgment of your poor in his cause.
7 Keep you far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous kill you not: for I
will not justify the wicked.
8 You shall take no gift: for the gift blinds the wise,
and perverts the words of the righteous.
9 Also you shall not oppress a stranger: for you know the heart of a stranger,
seeing you were strangers in the land of Egypt.
10 Six years you shall sow your land, and shall gather in the fruits thereof:
11 But the seventh year you shall let it rest and lie still;
that the poor of your people may eat: and what they leave the beasts of the field shall
eat. In like manner you shall deal with your vineyard, and with your oliveyard.
12 Six days you shall do your work, and on the seventh day you shall rest: that your ox
and your ass may rest, and the son of your handmaid, and the stranger,
may be refreshed.
13 In all things that I have said unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the
name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of your mouth.
14 Three times you shall keep a feast unto me in the year.
15 You shall keep the feast of unleavened bread: (you shall eat unleavened bread seven
days, as I commanded you, in the time appointed of the month Abib;
for in it you came out from Egypt: and none shall appear before me empty:)
16 The feast of harvest, the firstfruits of your labours,
which you have sown in the field: and the feast of ingathering,
which is in the end of the year, when you have gathered in your labours out of the
field.
17 Three times in the year all your males shall appear before the LORD God.
18 You shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread;
neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning.
19 The first of the firstfruits of your land you shall bring into the house of the LORD
your God. you shall not cooked a kid in his mother’s milk.
20 Behold, I send an Angel before you, to keep you in the way,
and to bring you into the place which I have prepared.
21 Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not;
for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.
22 But if you shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak;
then I will be an enemy unto your enemies, and an adversary unto your adversaries.
23 For mine Angel shall go before you, and bring you in unto the Amorites,
and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the Hivites,
and the Jebusites: and I will cut them off.
24 You shall not bow down to their gods, nor serve them,
nor do after their works: but you shall utterly overthrow them,
and quite break down their images.
25 You shall serve the LORD your God, and he shall bless your bread, and your water;
and I will take sickness away from the midst of you.
26 There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren,
in your land: the number of your days I will fulfil.
27 I will send my fear before you, and will destroy all the people to whom you shall
come, and I will make all your enemies turn their backs unto you.
28 I will send hornets before you, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite,
and the Hittite, from before you.
29 I will not drive them out from before you in one year;
lest the land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against you.
30 By little and little I will drive them out from before you, until you be increased,
and inherit the land.
31 I will set your bounds from the Red sea even unto the sea of the Philistines,
and from the desert unto the river: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into
your hand; and you shall drive them out before you.
32 You shall make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.
33 They shall not live in your land, lest they make you sin against me: for if you serve
their gods, it will surely be a snare unto you.

Chapter 24

1 He said unto Moses, Come up unto the LORD, you, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu,
and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship you afar off.
2 Moses alone shall come near the LORD: but they shall not come nigh;
neither shall the people go up with him.
3 Moses came and told the people all the words of the LORD,
and all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said,
All the words which the LORD has said will we do.
4 Moses wrote all the words of the LORD, and rose up early in the morning,
and built an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars,
according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
5 He sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings,
and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the LORD.
6 Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons;
and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
7 He took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they
said, All that the LORD has said will we do, and be obedient.
8 Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said,
Behold the blood of the covenant, which the LORD has made with you concerning all these
words.
9 Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of
Israel:
10 They saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a
sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.
11 Upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God,
and did eat and drink.
12 The LORD said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount,
and be there: and I will give you tables of stone, and a law,
and commandments which I have written; that you may teach them.
13 Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up into the mount of God.
14 He said unto the elders, stay you here for us, until we come again unto you: and,
behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any matters to do,
let him come unto them.
15 Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.
16 The glory of the LORD abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and
the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
17 The sight of the glory of the LORD was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in
the eyes of the children of Israel.
18 Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and went him up into the mount: and Moses was
in the mount forty days and forty nights.

Chapter 25

1 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
2 Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that
gives it willingly with his heart you shall take my offering.
3 This is the offering which you shall take of them; gold, and silver, and brass,
4 Blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair,
5 Rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood,
6 Oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for sweet incense,
7 Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate.
8 Let them make me a sanctuary; that I may live among them.
9 According to all that I show you, after the pattern of the tabernacle,
and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so shall you make it.
10 They shall make an ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half shall be the length
thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof,
and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
11 You shall overlay it with pure gold, within and without shall you overlay it,
and shall make upon it a crown of gold round about.
12 You shall cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four corners thereof;
and two rings shall be in the one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it.
13 You shall make staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
14 You shall put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark,
that the ark may be borne with them.
15 The staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be taken from it.
16 You shall put into the ark the testimony which I shall give you.
17 You shall make a mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half shall be the length
thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
18 You shall make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work shall you make them,
in the two ends of the mercy seat.
19 Make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other end: even of the
mercy seat shall you make the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
20 The cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high,
covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall look one to another;
toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims be.
21 You shall put the mercy seat above upon the ark;
and in the ark you shall put the testimony that I shall give you.
22 There I will meet with you, and I will commune with you from above the mercy seat,
from between the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony,
of all things which I will give you in commandment unto the children of Israel.
23 You shall also make a table of shittim wood: two cubits shall be the length thereof,
and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
24 You shall overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.
25 You shall make unto it a border of an hand breadth round about,
and you shall make a golden crown to the border thereof round about.
26 You shall make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that
are on the four feet thereof.
27 Over against the border shall the rings be for places of the staves to bear the
table.
28 You shall make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold,
that the table may be borne with them.
29 You shall make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers thereof,
and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shall you make them.
30 You shall set upon the table shewbread before me alway.
31 You shall make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work shall the candlestick be
made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers,
shall be of the same.
32 Six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches of the candlestick out
of the one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side:
33 Three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch;
and three bowls made like almonds in the other branch,
with a knop and a flower: so in the six branches that come out of the candlestick.
34 In the candlesticks shall be four bowls made like unto almonds,
with their knops and their flowers.
35 There shall be a knop under two branches of the same,
and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same,
according to the six branches that proceed out of the candlestick.
36 Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it shall be one beaten work
of pure gold.
37 You shall make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall light the lamps thereof,
that they may give light over against it.
38 The tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be of pure gold.
39 Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels.
40 Look that you make them after their pattern, which was showed you in the mount.

Chapter 26

1 Moreover you shall make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twined linen,
and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work shall you make
them.
2 The length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits,
and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains shall have one
measure.
3 The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another;
and other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.
4 You shall make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the
coupling; and likewise shall you make in the uttermost edge of another curtain,
in the coupling of the second.
5 Fifty loops shall you make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shall you make in the
edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of the second;
that the loops may take hold one of another.
6 You shall make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together with the taches:
and it shall be one tabernacle.
7 You shall make curtains of goats’ hair to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven
curtains shall you make.
8 The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits,
and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shall be all of one
measure.
9 You shall couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves,
and shall double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle.
10 You shall make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the
coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the curtain which couples the second.
11 You shall make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches into the loops,
and couple the tent together, that it may be one.
12 The remnant that remains of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remains,
shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle.
13 A cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of that which remains in the
length of the curtains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on
this side and on that side, to cover it.
14 You shall make a covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red,
and a covering above of badgers’ skins.
15 You shall make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood standing up.
16 Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half shall be the breadth
of one board.
17 Two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against another: thus shall
you make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
18 You shall make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side
southward.
19 You shall make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards;
two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for
his two tenons.
20 For the second side of the tabernacle on the north side there shall be twenty
boards:
21 Their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board,
and two sockets under another board.
22 For the sides of the tabernacle westward you shall make six boards.
23 Two boards shall you make for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.
24 They shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled together above the
head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be for them both;
they shall be for the two corners.
25 They shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets;
two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
26 You shall make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the
tabernacle,
27 Five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle,
for the two sides westward.
28 The middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end.
29 You shall overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for places for
the bars: and you shall overlay the bars with gold.
30 You shall rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion thereof which was showed you
in the mount.
31 You shall make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made:
32 You shall hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold: their hooks
shall be of gold, upon the four sockets of silver.
33 You shall hang up the vail under the taches, that you may bring in there within the
vail the ark of the testimony: and the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place
and the most holy.
34 You shall put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.
35 You shall set the table without the vail, and the candlestick over against the table
on the side of the tabernacle toward the south: and you shall put the table on the north
side.
36 You shall make an hanging for the door of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework.
37 You shall make for the hanging five pillars of shittim wood,
and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold: and you shall cast five
sockets of brass for them.

Chapter 27

1 You shall make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad;
the altar shall be foursquare: and the height thereof shall be three cubits.
2 You shall make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof: his horns shall be of the
same: and you shall overlay it with brass.
3 You shall make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels, and his basons,
and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the vessels thereof you shall make of
brass.
4 You shall make for it a grate of network of brass;
and upon the net shall you make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof.
5 You shall put it under the compass of the altar beneath,
that the net may be even to the midst of the altar.
6 You shall make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood,
and overlay them with brass.
7 The staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of
the altar, to bear it.
8 Hollow with boards shall you make it: as it was showed you in the mount,
so shall they make it.
9 You shall make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward there shall be
hangings for the court of fine twined linen of an hundred cubits long for one side:
10 The twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of brass;
the hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.
11 Likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings of an hundred cubits
long, and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets of brass;
the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.
12 For the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits: their
pillars ten, and their sockets ten.
13 The breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.
14 The hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits: their pillars three,
and their sockets three.
15 On the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits: their pillars three,
and their sockets three.
16 For the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple,
and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: and their pillars shall be
four, and their sockets four.
17 All the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with silver;
their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass.
18 The length of the court shall be an hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where,
and the height five cubits of fine twined linen, and their sockets of brass.
19 All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof,
and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of brass.
20 You shall command the children of Israel, that they bring you pure oil olive beaten
for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always.
21 In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is before the testimony,
Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the LORD: it shall be a
statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.

Chapter 28

1 Take you unto you Aaron your brother, and his sons with him,
from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office,
even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons.
2 You shall make holy garments for Aaron your brother for glory and for beauty.
3 You shall speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of
wisdom, that they may make Aaron’s garments to consecrate him,
that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
4 These are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe,
and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shall make holy garments for Aaron
your brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
5 They shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen.
6 They shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of scarlet,
and fine twined linen, with cunning work.
7 It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof;
and so it shall be joined together.
8 The curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be of the same,
according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen.
9 You shall take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of
Israel:
10 Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other
stone, according to their birth.
11 With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet,
shall you engrave the two stones with the names of the children of Israel: you shall make
them to be set in ouches of gold.
12 You shall put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod for stones of memorial
unto the children of Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names before the LORD upon his
two shoulders for a memorial.
13 You shall make ouches of gold;
14 Two chains of pure gold at the ends; of wreathen work shall you make them,
and fasten the wreathen chains to the ouches.
15 You shall make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work;
after the work of the ephod you shall make it; of gold, of blue, and of purple,
and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shall you make it.
16 Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall be the length thereof,
and a span shall be the breadth thereof.
17 You shall set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall
be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row.
18 The second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.
19 The third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.
20 The fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their
inclosings.
21 The stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve,
according to their names, like the engravings of a signet;
every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve tribes.
22 You shall make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of wreathen work of pure
gold.
23 You shall make upon the breastplate two rings of gold,
and shall put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
24 You shall put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings which are on the ends
of the breastplate.
25 The other two ends of the two wreathen chains you shall fasten in the two ouches,
and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod before it.
26 You shall make two rings of gold, and you shall put them upon the two ends of the
breastplate in the border thereof, which is in the side of the ephod inward.
27 Two other rings of gold you shall make, and shall put them on the two sides of the
ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the other coupling thereof,
above the curious girdle of the ephod.
28 They shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with
a lace of blue, that it may be above the curious girdle of the ephod,
and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.
29 Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment
upon his heart, when he goes in unto the holy place,
for a memorial before the LORD continually.
30 You shall put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim;
and they shall be upon Aaron’s heart, when he goes in before the LORD: and Aaron shall
bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the LORD
continually.
31 You shall make the robe of the ephod all of blue.
32 There shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst thereof: it shall have a binding
of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an habergeon,
that it be not rent.
33 Beneath upon the hem of it you shall make pomegranates of blue, and of purple,
and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and bells of gold between them round
about:
34 A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate,
upon the hem of the robe round about.
35 It shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goes in unto
the holy place before the LORD, and when he comes out, that he die not.
36 You shall make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it,
like the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.
37 You shall put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre;
upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.
38 It shall be upon Aaron’s forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy
things, which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts;
and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the LORD.
39 You shall embroider the coat of fine linen, and you shall make the mitre of fine
linen, and you shall make the girdle of needlework.
40 For Aaron’s sons you shall make coats, and you shall make for them girdles,
and bonnets shall you make for them, for glory and for beauty.
41 You shall put them upon Aaron your brother, and his sons with him;
and shall anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them,
that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
42 You shall make them linen breeches to cover their nakedness;
from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach:
43 They shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of
the congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place;
that they bear not iniquity, and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and his
seed after him.

Chapter 29

1 This is the thing that you shall do unto them to hallow them,
to minister unto me in the priest’s office: Take one young bullock,
and two rams without blemish,
2 Unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil,
and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of wheaten flour shall you make them.
3 You shall put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket,
with the bullock and the two rams.
4 Aaron and his sons you shall bring unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
and shall wash them with water.
5 You shall take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod,
and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the
ephod:
6 You shall put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.
7 Then shall you take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him.
8 You shall bring his sons, and put coats upon them.
9 You shall gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons,
and put the bonnets on them: and the priest’s office shall be theirs for a perpetual
statute: and you shall consecrate Aaron and his sons.
10 You shall cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation: and
Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.
11 You shall kill the bullock before the LORD, by the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
12 You shall take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar
with your finger, and pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.
13 You shall take all the fat that covers the inwards,
and the caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them,
and burn them upon the altar.
14 But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung,
shall you burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering.
15 You shall also take one ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the
head of the ram.
16 You shall kill the ram, and you shall take his blood,
and sprinkle it round about upon the altar.
17 You shall cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs,
and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head.
18 You shall burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt offering unto the LORD: it
is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
19 You shall take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the
head of the ram.
20 Then shall you kill the ram, and take of his blood,
and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of
his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right
foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
21 You shall take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil,
and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons,
and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his garments,
and his sons, and his sons’ garments with him.
22 Also you shall take of the ram the fat and the rump,
and the fat that covers the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys,
and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder;
for it is a ram of consecration:
23 One loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the
unleavened bread that is before the LORD:
24 You shall put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons;
and shall wave them for a wave offering before the LORD.
25 You shall receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt
offering, for a sweet savour before the LORD: it is an offering made by fire unto the
LORD.
26 You shall take the breast of the ram of Aaron’s consecration,
and wave it for a wave offering before the LORD: and it shall be your part.
27 You shall sanctify the breast of the wave offering,
and the shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up,
of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for Aaron,
and of that which is for his sons:
28 It shall be Aaron’s and his sons’ by a statute for ever from the children of Israel:
for it is an heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children of
Israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave offering unto the
LORD.
29 The holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons’ after him, to be anointed therein,
and to be consecrated in them.
30 That son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven days,
when he comes into the tabernacle of the congregation to minister in the holy place.
31 You shall take the ram of the consecration, and cooked his flesh in the holy
place.
32 Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram,
and the bread that is in the basket by the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
33 They shall eat those things with which the atonement was made,
to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat thereof,
because they are holy.
34 If owed of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning,
then you shall burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten,
because it is holy.
35 Thus shall you do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to all things which I have
commanded you: seven days shall you consecrate them.
36 You shall offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for atonement: and you shall
cleanse the altar, when you have made an atonement for it, and you shall anoint it,
to sanctify it.
37 Seven days you shall make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify it;
and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever touches the altar shall be holy.
38 Now this is that which you shall offer upon the altar;
two lambs of the first year day by day continually.
39 The one lamb you shall offer in the morning; and the other lamb you shall offer at
even:
40 With the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of
beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering.
41 The other lamb you shall offer at even, and shall do thereto according to the meat
offering of the morning, and according to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour,
an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
42 This shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD: where I will meet you,
to speak there unto you.
43 There I will meet with the children of Israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified
by my glory.
44 I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation,
and the altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons,
to minister to me in the priest’s office.
45 I will live among the children of Israel, and will be their God.
46 They shall know that I am the LORD their God, that brought them forth out of the land
of Egypt, that I may live among them: I am the LORD their God.

Chapter 30

1 You shall make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim wood shall you make it.
2 A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof;
foursquare shall it be: and two cubits shall be the height thereof: the horns thereof
shall be of the same.
3 You shall overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof,
and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof;
and you shall make unto it a crown of gold round about.
4 Two golden rings shall you make to it under the crown of it,
by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shall you make it;
and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.
5 You shall make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
6 You shall put it before the vail that is by the ark of the testimony,
before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where I will meet with you.
7 Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he dresses the lamps,
he shall burn incense upon it.
8 When Aaron lights the lamps at even, he shall burn incense upon it,
a perpetual incense before the LORD throughout your generations.
9 You shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat offering;
neither shall you pour drink offering thereon.
10 Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blood of
the sin offering of atonements: once in the year shall he make atonement upon it
throughout your generations: it is most holy unto the LORD.
11 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
12 When you take the sum of the children of Israel after their number,
then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the LORD, when you number them;
that there be no plague among them, when you number them.
13 This they shall give, every one that passes among them that are numbered,
half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) an half
shekel shall be the offering of the LORD.
14 Every one that passes among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and above,
shall give an offering unto the LORD.
15 The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel,
when they give an offering unto the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls.
16 You shall take the atonement money of the children of Israel,
and shall appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the congregation;
that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel before the LORD,
to make an atonement for your souls.
17 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
18 You shall also make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass,
to wash withal: and you shall put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the
altar, and you shall put water therein.
19 For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat:
20 When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash with water,
that they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister,
to burn offering made by fire unto the LORD:
21 So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not: and it shall be a
statute for ever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.
22 Moreover the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
23 Take you also unto you principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels,
and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels,
and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels,
24 Of cassia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary,
and of oil olive an hin:
25 You shall make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the are of the
apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil.
26 You shall anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith,
and the ark of the testimony,
27 The table and all his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels,
and the altar of incense,
28 The altar of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver and his foot.
29 You shall sanctify them, that they may be most holy: whatsoever touches them shall be
holy.
30 You shall anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them,
that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
31 You shall speak unto the children of Israel, saying,
This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.
32 Upon man’s flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall you make any other like it,
after the composition of it: it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you.
33 Whosoever compounds any like it, or whosoever putts any of it upon a stranger,
shall even be cut off from his people.
34 The LORD said unto Moses, Take unto you sweet spices, stacte, and onycha,
and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like
weight:
35 You shall make it a perfume, a confection after the are of the apothecary,
tempered together, pure and holy:
36 You shall beat some of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the
tabernacle of the congregation, where I will meet with you: it shall be unto you most
holy.
37 As for the perfume which you shall make, you shall not make to yourselves according to
the composition thereof: it shall be unto you holy for the LORD.
38 Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto,
shall even be cut off from his people.

Chapter 31

1 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
2 See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur,
of the tribe of Judah:
3 I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding,
and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
4 To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
5 In cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber,
to work in all manner of workmanship.
6 I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach,
of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have put wisdom,
that they may make all that I have commanded you;
7 The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony,
and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle,
8 The table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all his furniture,
and the altar of incense,
9 The altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver and his foot,
10 The cloths of service, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest,
and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office,
11 The anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that I have
commanded you shall they do.
12 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
13 Speak you also unto the children of Israel, saying,
Verily my sabbaths you shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your
generations; that you may know that I am the LORD that does sanctify you.
14 You shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every one that defiles
it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever does any work therein,
that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
15 Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest,
holy to the LORD: whosoever does any work in the sabbath day,
he shall surely be put to death.
16 Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath,
to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant.
17 It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for in six days the LORD
made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.
18 He gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai,
two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.

Chapter 32

1 When the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount,
the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods,
which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the
land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.
2 Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings,
which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters,
and bring them unto me.
3 All the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears,
and brought them unto Aaron.
4 He received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool,
after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These be your gods, O Israel,
which brought you up out of the land of Egypt.
5 When Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said,
To morrow is a feast to the LORD.
6 They rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings,
and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink,
and rose up to play.
7 The LORD said unto Moses, Go, get you down; for your people,
which you brought out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves:
8 They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them: they have made
them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said,
These be your gods, O Israel, which have brought you up out of the land of Egypt.
9 The LORD said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and, behold,
it is a stiffnecked people:
10 Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them,
and that I may consume them: and I will make of you a great nation.
11 Moses besought the LORD his God, and said, LORD,
why does your wrath wax hot against your people, which you have brought forth out of the
land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?
12 Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out,
to kill them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth?
Turn from your fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against your people.
13 Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, your servants,
to whom you swore by your own self, and said unto them,
I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of
will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.
14 The LORD repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people.
15 Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two tables of the testimony were
in his hand: the tables were written on both their sides;
on the one side and on the other were they written.
16 The tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God,
graven upon the tables.
17 When Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses,
There is a noise of war in the camp.
18 He said, It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery,
neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the noise of them that
sing do I hear.
19 As soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf,
and the dancing: and Moses’ anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands,
and brake them beneath the mount.
20 He took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire,
and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water,
and made the children of Israel drink of it.
21 Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto you,
that you have brought so great a sin upon them?
22 Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord wax hot: you know the people,
that they are set on mischief.
23 For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shall go before us: for as for this Moses,
the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt,
we know not what is become of him.
24 I said unto them, Whosoever has any gold, let them break it off.
So they gave it me: then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.
25 When Moses saw that the people were naked; (for Aaron had made them naked unto their
shame among their enemies:)
26 Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the LORD’s side?
let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.
27 He said unto them, Thus says the LORD God of Israel,
Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the
camp, and kill every man his brother, and every man his companion,
and every man his neighbour.
28 The children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people
that day about three thousand men.
29 For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves today to the LORD,
even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing
this day.
30 On the morrow, that Moses said unto the people, you have sinned a great sin: and now I
will go up unto the LORD; perhaps I shall make an atonement for your sin.
31 Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin,
and have made them gods of gold.
32 Yet now, if you will forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me, please,
out of your book which you have written.
33 The LORD said unto Moses, Whosoever has sinned against me,
him will I blot out of my book.
34 Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto you:
behold, mine Angel shall go before you: nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit
their sin upon them.
35 The LORD plagued the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made.

Chapter 33

1 The LORD said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence,
you and the people which you have brought up out of the land of Egypt,
unto the land which I swore unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying,
Unto your seed will I give it:
2 I will send an angel before you; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite,
and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:
3 Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the midst of you;
for you are a stiffnecked people: lest I consume you in the way.
4 When the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his
ornaments.
5 For the LORD had said unto Moses, Say unto the children of Israel,
you are a stiffnecked people: I will come up into the midst of you in a moment,
and consume you: therefore now put off your ornaments from you,
that I may know what to do unto you.
6 The children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb.
7 Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar off from the camp,
and called it the Tabernacle of the congregation. that every one which sought the LORD
went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp.
8 When Moses went out unto the tabernacle, that all the people rose up,
and stood every man at his tent door, and looked after Moses,
until he was gone into the tabernacle.
9 As Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended,
and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with Moses.
10 All the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door: and all the people
rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent door.
11 The LORD spoke unto Moses face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend.
And he turned again into the camp: but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man,
departed not out of the tabernacle.
12 Moses said unto the LORD, See, you say unto me, Bring up this people: and you have not
let me know whom you will send with me. Yet you have said, I know you by name,
and you have also found grace in my sight.
13 Now therefore, please, if I have found grace in your sight, show me now your way,
that I may know you, that I may find grace in your sight: and consider that this nation
is your people.
14 He said, My presence shall go with you, and I will give you rest.
15 He said unto him, If your presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.
16 For wherein shall it be known here that I and your people have found grace in your
sight? is it not in that you go with us? so shall we be separated, I and your people,
from all the people that are upon the face of the earth.
17 The LORD said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that you have spoken: for you have
found grace in my sight, and I know you by name.
18 He said, please, show me your glory.
19 He said, I will make all my goodness pass before you,
and I will proclaim the name of the LORD before you;
and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show
mercy.
20 He said, you can not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live.
21 The LORD said, Behold, there is a place by me, and you shall stand upon a rock:
22 It shall come to pass, while my glory passes by,
that I will put you in a clift of the rock, and will cover you with my hand while I pass
by:
23 I will take away mine hand, and you shall see my back parts: but my face shall not be
seen.

Chapter 34

1 The LORD said unto Moses, Hew you two tables of stone like unto the first: and I will
write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which you broke.
2 Be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai,
and present yourself there to me in the top of the mount.
3 No man shall come up with you, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount;
neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.
4 He hewed two tables of stone like unto the first;
and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai,
as the LORD had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.
5 The LORD descended in the cloud, and stood with him there,
and proclaimed the name of the LORD.
6 The LORD passed by before him, and proclaimed, The LORD, The LORD God,
merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
7 Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin,
and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, and upon the children’s children, unto the third and to the fourth
generation.
8 Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped.
9 He said, If now I have found grace in your sight, O LORD, let my LORD, please,
go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin,
and take us for your inheritance.
10 He said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all your people I will do marvels,
such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among
which you are shall see the work of the LORD: for it is a terrible thing that I will do
with you.
11 Observe you that which I command you this day: behold,
I drive out before you the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite,
and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
12 Take heed to yourself, lest you make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land where
you go, lest it be for a snare in the midst of you:
13 But you shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their groves:
14 For you shall worship no other god: for the LORD, whose name is Jealous,
is a jealous God:
15 Lest you make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land,
and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods,
and one call you, and you eat of his sacrifice;
16 You take of their daughters unto your sons, and their daughters go a whoring after
their gods, and make your sons go a whoring after their gods.
17 You shall make you no molten gods.
18 The feast of unleavened bread shall you keep. Seven days you shall eat unleavened
bread, as I commanded you, in the time of the month Abib: for in the month Abib you came
out from Egypt.
19 All that opens the matrix is mine; and every firstling among your cattle,
whether ox or sheep, that is male.
20 But the firstling of an ass you shall redeem with a lamb: and if you redeem him not,
then shall you break his neck. All the firstborn of your sons you shall redeem.
And none shall appear before me empty.
21 Six days you shall work, but on the seventh day you shall rest: in earing time and in
harvest you shall rest.
22 You shall observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of wheat harvest,
and the feast of ingathering at the year’s end.
23 Thrice in the year shall all your menchildren appear before the LORD God,
the God of Israel.
24 For I will cast out the nations before you, and enlarge your borders: neither shall
any man desire your land, when you shall go up to appear before the LORD your God thrice
in the year.
25 You shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven;
neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto the morning.
26 The first of the firstfruits of your land you shall bring unto the house of the LORD
your God. you shall not cooked a kid in his mother’s milk.
27 The LORD said unto Moses, Write you these words: for after the tenor of these words I
have made a covenant with you and with Israel.
28 He was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights;
he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the words of the
covenant, the ten commandments.
29 When Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses’ hand,
when he came down from the mount, that Moses knew not that the skin of his face shone
while he talked with him.
30 When Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold,
the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.
31 Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto
him: and Moses talked with them.
32 Afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all
that the LORD had spoken with him in mount Sinai.
33 Till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his face.
34 But when Moses went in before the LORD to speak with him, he took the vail off,
until he came out. And he came out, and spoke unto the children of Israel that which he
was commanded.
35 The children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses’ face shone: and
Moses put the vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him.

Chapter 35

1 Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel together,
and said unto them, These are the words which the LORD has commanded,
that you should do them.
2 Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day,
a sabbath of rest to the LORD: whosoever does work therein shall be put to death.
3 You shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day.
4 Moses spoke unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying,
This is the thing which the LORD commanded, saying,
5 Take you from among you an offering unto the LORD: whosoever is of a willing heart,
let him bring it, an offering of the LORD; gold, and silver, and brass,
6 Blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair,
7 Rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood,
8 Oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the sweet incense,
9 Onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.
10 Every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the LORD has commanded;
11 The tabernacle, his tent, and his covering, his taches, and his boards, his bars,
his pillars, and his sockets,
12 The ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat,
and the vail of the covering,
13 The table, and his staves, and all his vessels, and the shewbread,
14 The candlestick also for the light, and his furniture, and his lamps,
with the oil for the light,
15 The incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense,
and the hanging for the door at the entering in of the tabernacle,
16 The altar of burnt offering, with his brasen grate, his staves, and all his vessels,
the laver and his foot,
17 The hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets,
and the hanging for the door of the court,
18 The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords,
19 The cloths of service, to do service in the holy place,
the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons,
to minister in the priest’s office.
20 All the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of
Moses.
21 They came, every one whose heart stirred him up,
and every one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the LORD’s offering to the
work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his service,
and for the holy garments.
22 They came, both men and women, as many as were willing hearted, and brought bracelets,
and earrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and every man that offered
offered an offering of gold unto the LORD.
23 Every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen,
and goats’ hair, and red skins of rams, and badgers’ skins, brought them.
24 Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the LORD’s offering:
and every man, with whom was found shittim wood for any work of the service,
brought it.
25 All the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands,
and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet,
and of fine linen.
26 All the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun goats’ hair.
27 The rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod,
and for the breastplate;
28 Spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil,
and for the sweet incense.
29 The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the LORD, every man and woman,
whose heart made them willing to bring for all manner of work,
which the LORD had commanded to be made by the hand of Moses.
30 Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, the LORD has called by name Bezaleel the
son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah;
31 He has filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding,
and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship;
32 To devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
33 In the cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood,
to make any manner of cunning work.
34 He has put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach,
of the tribe of Dan.
35 Them has he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work, of the engraver,
and of the cunning workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet,
and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any work,
and of those that devise cunning work.

Chapter 36

1 Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man,
in whom the LORD put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of work for
the service of the sanctuary, according to all that the LORD had commanded.
2 Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man,
in whose heart the LORD had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to come
unto the work to do it:
3 They received of Moses all the offering, which the children of Israel had brought for
the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it withal.
And they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.
4 All the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary,
came every man from his work which they made;
5 They spoke unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service
of the work, which the LORD commanded to make.
6 Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp,
saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary.
So the people were restrained from bringing.
7 For the goods they had was sufficient for all the work to make it, and too much.
8 Every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten
curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple,
and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work made he them.
9 The length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits,
and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains were all of one size.
10 He coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other five curtains he coupled
one unto another.
11 He made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling:
likewise he made in the uttermost side of another curtain,
in the coupling of the second.
12 Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain
which was in the coupling of the second: the loops held one curtain to another.
13 He made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the
taches: so it became one tabernacle.
14 He made curtains of goats’ hair for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he
made them.
15 The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the breadth of one
curtain: the eleven curtains were of one size.
16 He coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.
17 He made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling,
and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which couples the second.
18 He made fifty taches of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.
19 He made a covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red,
and a covering of badgers’ skins above that.
20 He made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing up.
21 The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a
half.
22 One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did he make for all
the boards of the tabernacle.
23 He made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward:
24 Forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards;
two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for
his two tenons.
25 For the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the north corner,
he made twenty boards,
26 Their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board,
and two sockets under another board.
27 For the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.
28 Two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.
29 They were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head thereof,
to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners.
30 There were eight boards; and their sockets were sixteen sockets of silver,
under every board two sockets.
31 He made bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the
tabernacle,
32 Five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the sides westward.
33 He made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one end to the other.
34 He overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold to be places for the
bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.
35 He made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen: with cherubims made he it of cunning work.
36 He made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold: their
hooks were of gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver.
37 He made an hanging for the tabernacle door of blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen, of needlework;
38 The five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their chapiters and their
fillets with gold: but their five sockets were of brass.

Chapter 37

1 Bezaleel made the ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half was the length of it,
and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it:
2 He overlaid it with pure gold within and without,
and made a crown of gold to it round about.
3 He cast for it four rings of gold, to be set by the four corners of it;
even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it.
4 He made staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.
5 He put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.
6 He made the mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half was the length thereof,
and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
7 He made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made he them,
on the two ends of the mercy seat;
8 One cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the other end on that side:
out of the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
9 The cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered with their wings over the
mercy seat, with their faces one to another; even to the mercy seatward were the faces of
the cherubims.
10 He made the table of shittim wood: two cubits was the length thereof,
and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof:
11 He overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about.
12 Also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about;
and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.
13 He cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners that were
in the four feet thereof.
14 Over against the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the
table.
15 He made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold,
to bear the table.
16 He made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes, and his spoons,
and his bowls, and his covers to cover withal, of pure gold.
17 He made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick;
his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same:
18 Six branches going out of the sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of
the one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side
thereof:
19 Three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower;
and three bowls made like almonds in another branch,
a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches going out of the candlestick.
20 In the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops, and his flowers:
21 A knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same,
and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of
it.
22 Their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was one beaten work of pure
gold.
23 He made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his snuffdishes, of pure gold.
24 Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels thereof.
25 He made the incense altar of shittim wood: the length of it was a cubit,
and the breadth of it a cubit; it was foursquare; and two cubits was the height of it;
the horns thereof were of the same.
26 He overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the sides thereof round about,
and the horns of it: also he made unto it a crown of gold round about.
27 He made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it,
upon the two sides thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal.
28 He made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.
29 He made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices,
according to the work of the apothecary.

Chapter 38

1 He made the altar of burnt offering of shittim wood: five cubits was the length
thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it was foursquare;
and three cubits the height thereof.
2 He made the horns thereof on the four corners of it;
the horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.
3 He made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basons,
and the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the vessels thereof made he of brass.
4 He made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the compass thereof beneath unto
the midst of it.
5 He cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass,
to be places for the staves.
6 He made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with brass.
7 He put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it withal;
he made the altar hollow with boards.
8 He made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass,
of the lookingglasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.
9 He made the court: on the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine
twined linen, an hundred cubits:
10 Their pillars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty;
the hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of silver.
11 For the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits, their pillars were twenty,
and their sockets of brass twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of
silver.
12 For the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten,
and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.
13 For the east side eastward fifty cubits.
14 The hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits;
their pillars three, and their sockets three.
15 For the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that hand,
were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.
16 All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen.
17 The sockets for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets
of silver; and the overlaying of their chapiters of silver;
and all the pillars of the court were filleted with silver.
18 The hanging for the gate of the court was needlework, of blue, and purple,
and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was the length,
and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the
court.
19 Their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four;
their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their fillets of
silver.
20 All the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were of brass.
21 This is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of testimony,
as it was counted, according to the commandment of Moses, for the service of the Levites,
by the hand of Ithamar, son to Aaron the priest.
22 Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
made all that the LORD commanded Moses.
23 With him was Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver,
and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet,
and fine linen.
24 All the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of the holy place,
even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents,
and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
25 The silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was an hundred talents,
and a thousand seven hundred and sixty and fifteen shekels,
after the shekel of the sanctuary:
26 A bekah for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary,
for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward,
for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.
27 Of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the sanctuary,
and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the hundred talents,
a talent for a socket.
28 Of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars,
and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted them.
29 The brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred
shekels.
30 Therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar,
31 The sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the court gate,
and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

Chapter 39

1 Of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service,
to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron;
as the LORD commanded Moses.
2 He made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
3 They did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue,
and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cunning work.
4 They made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the two edges was it coupled
together.
5 The curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the same,
according to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen; as the LORD commanded Moses.
6 They wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven,
with the names of the children of Israel.
7 He put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should be stones for a memorial to
the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses.
8 He made the breastplate of cunning work, like the work of the ephod;
of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
9 It was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was the length thereof,
and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled.
10 They set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a sardius, a topaz,
and a carbuncle: this was the first row.
11 The second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.
12 The third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.
13 The fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were inclosed in ouches of gold
in their inclosings.
14 The stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve,
according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one with his name,
according to the twelve tribes.
15 They made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, of wreathen work of pure gold.
16 They made two ouches of gold, and two gold rings;
and put the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate.
17 They put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on the ends of the
breastplate.
18 The two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the two ouches,
and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before it.
19 They made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the breastplate,
upon the border of it, which was on the side of the ephod inward.
20 They made two other golden rings, and put them on the two sides of the ephod
underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against the other coupling thereof,
above the curious girdle of the ephod.
21 They did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of
blue, that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod,
and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod;
as the LORD commanded Moses.
22 He made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.
23 There was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of an habergeon,
with a band round about the hole, that it should not rend.
24 They made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and twined linen.
25 They made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates upon the hem
of the robe, round about between the pomegranates;
26 A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate,
round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the LORD commanded Moses.
27 They made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons,
28 A mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of fine linen,
and linen breeches of fine twined linen,
29 A girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of needlework;
as the LORD commanded Moses.
30 They made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing,
like to the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.
31 They tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon the mitre;
as the LORD commanded Moses.
32 Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished: and
the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded Moses,
so did they.
33 They brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and all his furniture, his taches,
his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his sockets,
34 The covering of rams’ skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers’ skins,
and the vail of the covering,
35 The ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat,
36 The table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread,
37 The pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to be set in order,
and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light,
38 The golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense,
and the hanging for the tabernacle door,
39 The brasen altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels,
the laver and his foot,
40 The hangings of the court, his pillars, and his sockets,
and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his pins,
and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle,
for the tent of the congregation,
41 The cloths of service to do service in the holy place,
and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his sons’ garments,
to minister in the priest’s office.
42 According to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the
work.
43 Moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done it as the LORD had
commanded, even so had they done it: and Moses blessed them.

Chapter 40

1 The LORD spoke unto Moses, saying,
2 On the first day of the first month shall you set up the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation.
3 You shall put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail.
4 You shall bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order
upon it; and you shall bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.
5 You shall set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony,
and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle.
6 You shall set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the
tent of the congregation.
7 You shall set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar,
and shall put water therein.
8 You shall set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging at the court gate.
9 You shall take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein,
and shall hallow it, and all the vessels thereof: and it shall be holy.
10 You shall anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all his vessels,
and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most holy.
11 You shall anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.
12 You shall bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and wash them with water.
13 You shall put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him;
that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
14 You shall bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:
15 You shall anoint them, as you did anoint their father,
that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office: for their anointing shall surely
be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.
16 Thus did Moses: according to all that the LORD commanded him, so did he.
17 In the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month,
that the tabernacle was reared up.
18 Moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets,
and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof,
and reared up his pillars.
19 He spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above
upon it; as the LORD commanded Moses.
20 He took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark,
and put the mercy seat above upon the ark:
21 He brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the covering,
and covered the ark of the testimony; as the LORD commanded Moses.
22 He put the table in the tent of the congregation,
upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail.
23 He set the bread in order upon it before the LORD;
as the LORD had commanded Moses.
24 He put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over against the table,
on the side of the tabernacle southward.
25 He lighted the lamps before the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.
26 He put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail:
27 He burnt sweet incense thereon; as the LORD commanded Moses.
28 He set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.
29 He put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation, and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering;
as the LORD commanded Moses.
30 He set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar,
and put water there, to wash withal.
31 Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat:
32 When they went into the tent of the congregation,
and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the LORD commanded Moses.
33 He reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar,
and set up the hanging of the court gate. So Moses finished the work.
34 Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation,
and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.
35 Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation,
because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.
36 When the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle,
the children of Israel went onward in all their journeys:
37 But if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was
taken up.
38 For the cloud of the LORD was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night,
in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.