The Gospel According to Saint Luke

Chapter 1

1 Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those
things which are most surely believed among us,
2 Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were eyewitnesses,
and ministers of the word;
3 It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very
first, to write unto you in order, most excellent Theophilus,
4 That you might know the certainty of those things,
wherein you have been instructed.
5 THERE was in the days of Herod, the king of Judaea, a certain priest named Zacharias,
of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron,
and her name was Elisabs.
6 They were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless.
7 They had no child, because that Elisabs was barren,
and they both were now well stricken in years.
8 That while he executed the priest’s office before God in the order of his course,
9 According to the custom of the priest’s office, his lot was to burn incense when he
went into the temple of the Lord.
10 The whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of incense.
11 There appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar
of incense.
12 When Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.
13 But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for your prayer is heard;
and your wife Elisabs shall bear you a son, and you shall call his name John.
14 You shall have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth.
15 For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor
strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost,
even from his mother’s womb.
16 Many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.
17 He shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias,
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of
the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.
18 Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this?
for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.
19 The angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God;
and am sent to speak unto you, and to show you these glad tidings.
20 And, behold, you shall be dumb, and not able to speak,
until the day that these things shall be performed, because you believe not my words,
which shall be fulfilled in their season.
21 The people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he stayed so long in the
temple.
22 When he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they perceived that he had seen a
vision in the temple: for he beckoned unto them, and remained speechless.
23 That, as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished,
he departed to his own house.
24 After those days his wife Elisabs conceived, and hid herself five months, saying,
25 Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me,
to take away my reproach among men.
26 In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee,
named Nazars,
27 To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David;
and the virgin’s name was Mary.
28 The angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, you that are highly favoured,
the Lord is with you: blessed are you among women.
29 When she saw him, she was troubled at his saying,
and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.
30 The angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for you have found favour with God.
31 And, behold, you shall conceive in your womb, and bring forth a son,
and shall call his name JESUS.
32 He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall
give unto him the throne of his father David:
33 He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever;
and of his kingdom there shall be no end.
34 Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?
35 The angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon you,
and the power of the Highest shall overshadow you: therefore also that holy thing which
shall be born of you shall be called the Son of God.
36 And, behold, your cousin Elisabs, she has also conceived a son in her old age: and
this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren.
37 For with God nothing shall be impossible.
38 Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to your word.
And the angel departed from her.
39 Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste,
into a city of Juda;
40 Entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabs.
41 That, when Elisabs heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb;
and Elisabs was filled with the Holy Ghost:
42 She spoke out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed are you among women,
and blessed is the fruit of your womb.
43 Where is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
44 For, lo, as soon as the voice of your salutation sounded in mine ears,
the babe leaped in my womb for joy.
45 Blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of those things which
were told her from the Lord.
46 Mary said, My soul does magnify the Lord,
47 My spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour.
48 For he has regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for, behold,
from from now on all generations shall call me blessed.
49 For he that is mighty has done to me great things; and holy is his name.
50 His mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation.
51 He has showed strength with his arm; he has scattered the proud in the imagination of
their hearts.
52 He has put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.
53 He has filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he has sent empty away.
54 He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy;
55 As he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.
56 Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.
57 Now Elisabs’s full time came that she should be delivered;
and she brought forth a son.
58 Her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had showed great mercy upon her;
and they rejoiced with her.
59 That on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child;
and they called him Zacharias, after the name of his father.
60 His mother answered and said, Not so; but he shall be called John.
61 They said unto her, There is none of your kindred that is called by this name.
62 They made signs to his father, how he would have him called.
63 He asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is John.
And they marvelled all.
64 His mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spoke,
and praised God.
65 Fear came on all that lived round about them: and all these sayings were noised abroad
throughout all the hill country of Judaea.
66 All they that heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying,
What manner of child shall this be! And the hand of the Lord was with him.
67 His father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying,
68 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he has visited and redeemed his people,
69 Has raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David;
70 As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the world
began:
71 That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us;
72 To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant;
73 The oath which he swore to our father Abraham,
74 That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies
might serve him without fear,
75 In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.
76 You, child, shall be called the prophet of the Highest: for you shall go before the
face of the Lord to prepare his ways;
77 To give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their sins,
78 Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high has visited
us,
79 To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death,
to guide our feet into the way of peace.
80 The child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his
shewing unto Israel.

Chapter 2

1 In those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus that all the world
should be taxed.
2 (And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.)
3 All went to be taxed, every one into his own city.
4 Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazars, into Judaea,
unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and
lineage of David:)
5 To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child.
6 So it was, that, while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be
delivered.
7 She brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in wrapping clothes,
and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn.
8 There were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field,
keeping watch over their flock by night.
9 And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round
about them: and they were sore afraid.
10 The angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold,
I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.
11 For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour,
which is Christ the Lord.
12 This shall be a sign unto you; you shall find the babe wrapped in wrapping clothes,
lying in a manger.
13 Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God,
and saying,
14 Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.
15 As the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another,
Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass,
which the Lord has made known unto us.
16 They came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger.
17 When they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them
concerning this child.
18 All they that heard it wondered at those things which were told them by the
shepherds.
19 But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.
20 The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had
heard and seen, as it was told unto them.
21 When eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child,
his name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the
womb.
22 When the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished,
they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord;
23 (As it is written in the law of the LORD, Every male that opens the womb shall be
called holy to the Lord;)
24 To offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord,
A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.
25 And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon;
and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy
Ghost was upon him.
26 It was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death,
before he had seen the Lord’s Christ.
27 He came by the Spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in the child
Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,
28 Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said,
29 Lord, now lett you your servant depart in peace, according to your word:
30 For mine eyes have seen your salvation,
31 Which you have prepared before the face of all people;
32 A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of your people Israel.
33 Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were spoken of him.
34 Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold,
this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel;
and for a sign which shall be spoken against;
35 (Yea, a sword shall pierce through your own soul also,) that the thoughts of many
hearts may be revealed.
36 There was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel,
of the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years
from her virginity;
37 She was a widow of about eighty and four years, which departed not from the temple,
but served God with fastings and prayers night and day.
38 She coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord,
and spoke of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
39 When they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord,
they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazars.
40 The child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God
was upon him.
41 Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover.
42 When he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the
feast.
43 When they had fulfilled the days, as they returned,
the child Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and his mother knew not of it.
44 But they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day’s journey;
and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.
45 When they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking him.
46 That after three days they found him in the temple,
sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions.
47 All that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.
48 When they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son,
why have you thus dealt with us? behold, your father and I have sought you sorrowing.
49 He said unto them, How is it that you sought me?
knew you not that I must be about my Father’s business?
50 They understood not the saying which he spoke unto them.
51 He went down with them, and came to Nazars, and was subject unto them: but his mother
kept all these sayings in her heart.
52 Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man.

Chapter 3

1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar,
Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee,
and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis,
and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene,
2 Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the son of
Zacharias in the wilderness.
3 He came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins;
4 As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying,
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare you the way of the Lord,
make his paths straight.
5 Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low;
and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth;
6 All flesh shall see the salvation of God.
7 Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him,
O generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
8 Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance,
and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto
you, That God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
9 Now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: every tree therefore which brings
not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
10 The people asked him, saying, What shall we do then?
11 He answers and says unto them, He that has two coats,
let him impart to him that has none; and he that has meat, let him do likewise.
12 Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, Master,
what shall we do?
13 He said unto them, Exact no more than that which is appointed you.
14 The soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do?
And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely;
and be content with your wages.
15 As the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts of John,
whether he were the Christ, or not;
16 John answered, saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water;
but one mightier than I comes, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose: he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire:
17 Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor,
and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn with fire
unquenchable.
18 Many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people.
19 But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias his brother Philip’s wife,
and for all the evils which Herod had done,
20 Added yet this above all, that he shut up John in prison.
21 Now when all the people were baptized, that Jesus also being baptized, and praying,
the heaven was opened,
22 The Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him,
and a voice came from heaven, which said, you are my beloved Son;
in you I am well pleased.
23 Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age,
being (as was supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli,
24 Which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was the son of Melchi,
which was the son of Janna, which was the son of Joseph,
25 Which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum,
which was the son of Esli, which was the son of Nagge,
26 Which was the son of Maath, which was the son of Mattathias,
which was the son of Semei, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Juda,
27 Which was the son of Joanna, which was the son of Rhesa,
which was the son of Zorobabel, which was the son of Salathiel,
which was the son of Neri,
28 Which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam,
which was the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er,
29 Which was the son of Jose, which was the son of Eliezer, which was the son of Jorim,
which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi,
30 Which was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Juda, which was the son of Joseph,
which was the son of Jonan, which was the son of Eliakim,
31 Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan, which was the son of Mattatha,
which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David,
32 Which was the son of Jesse, which was the son of Obed, which was the son of Booz,
which was the son of Salmon, which was the son of Naasson,
33 Which was the son of Aminadab, which was the son of Aram, which was the son of Esrom,
which was the son of Phares, which was the son of Juda,
34 Which was the son of Jacob, which was the son of Isaac, which was the son of Abraham,
which was the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor,
35 Which was the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec,
which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala,
36 Which was the son of Cainan, which was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of Sem,
which was the son of Noe, which was the son of Lamech,
37 Which was the son of Mathusala, which was the son of Enoch,
which was the son of Jared, which was the son of Maleleel,
which was the son of Cainan,
38 Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam,
which was the son of God.

Chapter 4

1 Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan,
and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
2 Being forty days tempted of the devil. And in those days he did eat nothing: and when
they were ended, he afterward hungered.
3 The devil said unto him, If you be the Son of God,
command this stone that it be made bread.
4 Jesus answered him, saying, It is written, That man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word of God.
5 The devil, taking him up into an high mountain, showed unto him all the kingdoms of the
world in a moment of time.
6 The devil said unto him, All this power will I give you,
and the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me;
and to whomsoever I will I give it.
7 If you therefore will worship me, all shall be your.
8 Jesus answered and said unto him, Get you behind me, Satan: for it is written,
you shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.
9 He brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the temple,
and said unto him, If you be the Son of God, cast yourself down from hence:
10 For it is written, He shall give his angels charge over you, to keep you:
11 In their hands they shall bear you up, lest at any time you dash your foot against a
stone.
12 Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, you shall not tempt the Lord your God.
13 When the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for a season.
14 Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and there went out a fame of
him through all the region round about.
15 He taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all.
16 He came to Nazars, where he had been brought up: and, as his custom was,
he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read.
17 There was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias.
And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written,
18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the gospel to
the poor; he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted,
to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind,
to set at liberty them that are bruised,
19 To preach the acceptable year of the Lord.
20 He closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down.
And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him.
21 He began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.
22 All gave birth to him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out
of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph’s son?
23 He said unto them, you will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician,
heal yourself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum,
do also here in your country.
24 He said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country.
25 But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias,
when the heaven was shut up three years and six months,
when great famine was throughout all the land;
26 But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon,
unto a woman that was a widow.
27 Many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet;
and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.
28 All they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath,
29 Rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon
their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong.
30 But he passing through the midst of them went his way,
31 Came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath days.
32 They were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with power.
33 In the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an unclean devil,
and cried out with a loud voice,
34 Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with you, you Jesus of Nazars?
are you come to destroy us? I know you who you are; the Holy One of God.
35 Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold your peace, and come out of him.
And when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him, and hurt him not.
36 They were all amazed, and spoke among themselves, saying, What a word is this!
for with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out.
37 The fame of him went out into every place of the country round about.
38 He arose out of the synagogue, and entered into Simon’s house.
And Simon’s wife’s mother was taken with a great fever;
and they besought him for her.
39 He stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her: and immediately she arose
and ministered unto them.
40 Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with divers diseases brought
them unto him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them.
41 Devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, you are Christ the Son of God.
And he rebuking them suffered them not to speak: for they knew that he was Christ.
42 When it was day, he departed and went into a desert place: and the people sought him,
and came unto him, and stayed him, that he should not depart from them.
43 He said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also: for
therefore am I sent.
44 He preached in the synagogues of Galilee.

Chapter 5

1 That, as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God,
he stood by the lake of Gennesaret,
2 Saw two ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them,
and were washing their nets.
3 He entered into one of the ships, which was Simon’s,
and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land.
And he sat down, and taught the people out of the ship.
4 Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into the deep,
and let down your nets for a draught.
5 Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled all the night,
and have taken nothing: nevertheless at your word I will let down the net.
6 When they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes: and their net
brake.
7 They beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other ship,
that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled both the ships,
so that they began to sink.
8 When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, Depart from me;
for I am a sinful man, O Lord.
9 For he was astonished, and all that were with him,
at the draught of the fishes which they had taken:
10 So was also James, and John, the sons of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon.
And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not; from from now on you shall catch men.
11 When they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all, and followed him.
12 When he was in a certain city, behold a man full of leprosy: who seeing Jesus fell on
his face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if you will, you can make me clean.
13 He put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will: be you clean.
And immediately the leprosy departed from him.
14 He charged him to tell no man: but go, and show yourself to the priest,
and offer for your cleansing, according as Moses commanded,
for a testimony unto them.
15 But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: and great multitudes came
together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities.
16 He withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed.
17 On a certain day, as he was teaching, that there were Pharisees and doctors of the law
sitting by, which were come out of every town of Galilee, and Judaea,
and Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord was present to heal them.
18 And, behold, men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a palsy: and they sought
means to bring him in, and to lay him before him.
19 When they could not find by what way they might bring him in because of the multitude,
they went upon the housetop, and let him down through the tiling with his couch into the
midst before Jesus.
20 When he saw their faith, he said unto him, Man, your sins are forgiven you.
21 The scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying,
Who is this which speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?
22 But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto them,
What reason you in your hearts?
23 Whether is easier, to say, your sins be forgiven you; or to say, Rise up and walk?
24 But that you may know that the Son of man has power upon earth to forgive sins,
(he said unto the sick of the palsy,) I say unto you, Arise, and take up your couch,
and go into your house.
25 Immediately he rose up before them, and took up that whereon he lay,
and departed to his own house, glorifying God.
26 They were all amazed, and they glorified God, and were filled with fear, saying,
We have seen strange things to day.
27 After these things he went forth, and saw a publican, named Levi,
sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, Follow me.
28 He left all, rose up, and followed him.
29 Levi made him a great feast in his own house: and there was a great company of
publicans and of others that sat down with them.
30 But their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying,
Why do you eat and drink with publicans and sinners?
31 Jesus answering said unto them, They that are whole need not a physician;
but they that are sick.
32 I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
33 They said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often, and make prayers,
and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees; but your eat and drink?
34 He said unto them, Can you make the children of the bridechamber fast,
while the bridegroom is with them?
35 But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them,
and then shall they fast in those days.
36 He spoke also a parable unto them; No man putts a piece of a new garment upon an old;
if otherwise, then both the new makes a rent, and the piece that was taken out of the new
agrees not with the old.
37 No man putts new wine into old bottles; else the new wine will burst the bottles,
and be spilled, and the bottles shall perish.
38 But new wine must be put into new bottles; and both are preserved.
39 No man also having drunk old wine straightway desires new: for he says,
The old is better.

Chapter 6

1 On the second sabbath after the first, that he went through the corn fields;
and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands.
2 Certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why do you that which is not lawful to do on
the sabbath days?
3 Jesus answering them said, Have you not read so much as this, what David did,
when himself was an hungred, and they which were with him;
4 How he went into the house of God, and did take and eat the shewbread,
and gave also to them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the
priests alone?
5 He said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.
6 Also on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue and taught: and there was a
man whose right hand was withered.
7 The scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the sabbath day;
that they might find an accusation against him.
8 But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up,
and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and stood forth.
9 Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing;
Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil?
to save life, or to destroy it?
10 Looking round about upon them all, he said unto the man, Stretch forth your hand.
And he did so: and his hand was restored whole as the other.
11 They were filled with madness; and communed one with another what they might do to
Jesus.
12 In those days, that he went out into a mountain to pray,
and continued all night in prayer to God.
13 When it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of them he chose twelve,
whom also he named apostles;
14 Simon, (whom he also named Peter,) and Andrew his brother, James and John,
Philip and Bartholomew,
15 Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon called Zelotes,
16 Judas the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, which also was the traitor.
17 He came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples,
and a great multitude of people out of all Judaea and Jerusalem,
and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him,
and to be healed of their diseases;
18 They that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed.
19 The whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him,
and healed them all.
20 He lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said,
Blessed be you poor: for yours is the kingdom of God.
21 Blessed are you that hunger now: for you shall be filled.
Blessed are you that weep now: for you shall laugh.
22 Blessed are you, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their
company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil,
for the Son of man’s sake.
23 Rejoice you in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold,
your reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the
prophets.
24 But woe unto you that are rich! for you have received your consolation.
25 Woe unto you that are full! for you shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now!
for you shall mourn and weep.
26 Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you!
for so did their fathers to the false prophets.
27 But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you,
28 Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you.
29 Unto him that smites you on the one cheek offer also the other;
and him that takes away your cloak forbid not to take your coat also.
30 Give to every man that asks of you; and of him that takes away your goods ask them not
again.
31 As you would that men should do to you, do you also to them likewise.
32 For if you love them which love you, what thank have you?
for sinners also love those that love them.
33 If you do good to them which do good to you, what thank have you?
for sinners also do even the same.
34 If you lend to them of whom you hope to receive, what thank have you?
for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again.
35 But love you your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again;
and your reward shall be great, and you shall be the children of the Highest: for he is
kind unto the unthankful and to the evil.
36 Be you therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.
37 Judge not, and you shall not be judged: condemn not,
and you shall not be condemned: forgive, and you shall be forgiven:
38 Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together,
and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For with the same measure that you mete
withal it shall be measured to you again.
39 He spoke a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind?
shall they not both fall into the ditch?
40 The disciple is not above his master: but every one that is perfect shall be as his
master.
41 Why behold you the mote that is in your brother’s eye,
but perceive not the beam that is in your own eye?
42 Either how can you say to your brother, Brother,
let me pull out the mote that is in your eye, when you yourself behold not the beam that
is in your own eye? you hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of your own eye,
and then shall you see clearly to pull out the mote that is in your brother’s eye.
43 For a good tree brings not forth corrupt fruit; neither does a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit.
44 For every tree is known by his own fruit. For of thorns men do not gather figs,
nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes.
45 A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is good;
and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth that which is evil:
for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.
46 Why call you me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
47 Whosoever comes to me, and hears my sayings, and does them,
I will show you to whom he is like:
48 He is like a man which built an house, and digged deep,
and laid the foundation on a rock: and when the flood arose,
the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was founded
upon a rock.
49 But he that hears, and does not, is like a man that without a foundation built an
house upon the earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently,
and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was great.

Chapter 7

1 Now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people,
he entered into Capernaum.
2 A certain centurion’s servant, who was dear unto him, was sick, and ready to die.
3 When he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the Jews,
beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant.
4 When they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying,
That he was worthy for whom he should do this:
5 For he loves our nation, and he has built us a synagogue.
6 Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house,
the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord,
trouble not yourself: for I am not worthy that you should enter under my roof:
7 Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto you: but say in a word,
and my servant shall be healed.
8 For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers, and I say unto one,
Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes;
and to my servant, Do this, and he does it.
9 When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and turned him about,
and said unto the people that followed him, I say unto you,
I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.
10 They that were sent, returning to the house, found the servant whole that had been
sick.
11 The day after, that he went into a city called Nain;
and many of his disciples went with him, and much people.
12 Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold,
there was a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother,
and she was a widow: and much people of the city was with her.
13 When the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not.
14 He came and touched the bier: and they that gave birth to him stood still.
And he said, Young man, I say unto you, Arise.
15 He that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him to his mother.
16 There came a fear on all: and they glorified God, saying,
That a great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God has visited his people.
17 This rumour of him went forth throughout all Judaea,
and throughout all the region round about.
18 The disciples of John showed him of all these things.
19 John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to Jesus, saying,
are you he that should come? or look we for another?
20 When the men were come unto him, they said, John Baptist has sent us unto you, saying,
are you he that should come? or look we for another?
21 In that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits;
and unto many that were blind he gave sight.
22 Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way,
and tell John what things you have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised,
to the poor the gospel is preached.
23 Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.
24 When the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak unto the people
concerning John, What went you out into the wilderness for to see?
A reed shaken with the wind?
25 But what went you out for to see? A man clothed in soft clothing?
Behold, they which are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately,
are in kings’ courts.
26 But what went you out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you,
and much more than a prophet.
27 This is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before your face,
which shall prepare your way before you.
28 For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet
than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.
29 All the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God,
being baptized with the baptism of John.
30 But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves,
being not baptized of him.
31 The Lord said, Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this generation?
and to what are they like?
32 They are like unto children sitting in the marketplace, and calling one to another,
and saying, We have piped unto you, and you have not danced;
we have mourned to you, and you have not wept.
33 For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine;
and you say, He has a devil.
34 The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and you say, Behold a gluttonous man,
and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners!
35 But wisdom is justified of all her children.
36 One of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him.
And he went into the Pharisee’s house, and sat down to meat.
37 And, behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner,
when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee’s house,
brought an alabaster box of ointment,
38 Stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears,
and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet,
and anointed them with the ointment.
39 Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spoke within himself, saying,
This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is
that touches him: for she is a sinner.
40 Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto you.
And he says, Master, say on.
41 There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence,
and the other fifty.
42 When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both.
Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?
43 Simon answered and said, I suppose that he, to whom he forgave most.
And he said unto him, you have rightly judged.
44 He turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, see you this woman?
I entered into your house, you gave me no water for my feet: but she has washed my feet
with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head.
45 You gave me no kiss: but this woman since the time I came in has not ceased to kiss my
feet.
46 My head with oil you did not anoint: but this woman has anointed my feet with
ointment.
47 Wherefore I say unto you, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven;
for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little.
48 He said unto her, your sins are forgiven.
49 They that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves,
Who is this that forgives sins also?
50 He said to the woman, your faith has saved you; go in peace.

Chapter 8

1 Afterward, that he went throughout every city and village,
preaching and shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God: and the twelve were with
him,
2 Certain women, which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities,
Mary called Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils,
3 Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and many others,
which ministered unto him of their substance.
4 When much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of every city,
he spoke by a parable:
5 A sower went out to sow his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side;
and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it.
6 Some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away,
because it lacked moisture.
7 Some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it.
8 Other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and gave birth to fruit an hundredfold.
And when he had said these things, he cried, He that has ears to hear, let him hear.
9 His disciples asked him, saying, What might this parable be?
10 He said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but to
others in parables; that seeing they might not see,
and hearing they might not understand.
11 Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.
12 Those by the way side are they that hear; then comes the devil,
and takes away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved.
13 They on the rock are they, which, when they hear, receive the word with joy;
and these have no root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall
away.
14 That which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have heard, go forth,
and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this life,
and bring no fruit to perfection.
15 But that on the good ground are they, which in an honest and good heart,
having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
16 No man, when he has lighted a candle, covers it with a vessel,
or putts it under a bed; but setts it on a candlestick,
that they which enter in may see the light.
17 For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest;
neither any thing hid, that shall not be known and come abroad.
18 Take heed therefore how you hear: for whosoever has, to him shall be given;
and whosoever has not, from him shall be taken even that which he seems to have.
19 Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come at him for the
press.
20 It was told him by certain which said, your mother and your brethren stand without,
desiring to see you.
21 He answered and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are these which hear the
word of God, and do it.
22 Now on a certain day, that he went into a ship with his disciples: and he said unto
them, Let us go over unto the other side of the lake. And they launched forth.
23 But as they sailed he fell asleep: and there came down a storm of wind on the lake;
and they were filled with water, and were in jeopardy.
24 They came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we perish.
Then he arose, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water: and they ceased,
and there was a calm.
25 He said unto them, Where is your faith? And they being afraid wondered,
saying one to another, What manner of man is this! for he commands even the winds and
water, and they obey him.
26 They arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against Galilee.
27 When he went forth to land, there met him out of the city a certain man,
which had devils long time, and ware no clothes, neither abode in any house,
but in the tombs.
28 When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said,
What have I to do with you, Jesus, you Son of God most high? please, torment me not.
29 (For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man.
For oftentimes it had caught him: and he was kept bound with chains and in fetters;
and he brake the bands, and was driven of the devil into the wilderness.)
30 Jesus asked him, saying, What is your name? And he said,
Legion: because many devils were entered into him.
31 They besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep.
32 There was there an herd of many swine feeding on the mountain: and they besought him
that he would suffer them to enter into them. And he suffered them.
33 Then went the devils out of the man, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran
violently down a steep place into the lake, and were choked.
34 When they that fed them saw what was done, they fled,
and went and told it in the city and in the country.
35 Then they went out to see what was done; and came to Jesus, and found the man,
out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed,
and in his right mind: and they were afraid.
36 They also which saw it told them by what means he that was possessed of the devils was
healed.
37 Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about besought him to
depart from them; for they were taken with great fear: and he went up into the ship,
and returned back again.
38 Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him that he might be with
him: but Jesus sent him away, saying,
39 Return to your own house, and show how great things God has done unto you.
And he went his way, and published throughout the whole city how great things Jesus had
done unto him.
40 That, when Jesus was returned, the people gladly received him: for they were all
waiting for him.
41 And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue: and
he fell down at Jesus’ feet, and besought him that he would come into his house:
42 For he had one only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she lay a dying.
But as he went the people thronged him.
43 A woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all her living upon
physicians, neither could be healed of any,
44 Came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and immediately her issue of
blood stanched.
45 Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied, Peter and they that were with him said,
Master, the multitude throng you and press you, and say you, Who touched me?
46 Jesus said, Somebody has touched me: for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me.
47 When the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling,
and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the people for what cause
she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately.
48 He said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort: your faith has made you whole;
go in peace.
49 While he yet spoke, there comes one from the ruler of the synagogue’s house,
saying to him, your daughter is dead; trouble not the Master.
50 But when Jesus heard it, he answered him, saying, Fear not: believe only,
and she shall be made whole.
51 When he came into the house, he suffered no man to go in, save Peter, and James,
and John, and the father and the mother of the maiden.
52 All wept, and bewailed her: but he said, Weep not; she is not dead, but sleeps.
53 They laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.
54 He put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called, saying, Maid, arise.
55 Her spirit came again, and she arose straightway: and he commanded to give her
meat.
56 Her parents were astonished: but he charged them that they should tell no man what was
done.

Chapter 9

1 Then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority over
all devils, and to cure diseases.
2 He sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.
3 He said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor scrip,
neither bread, neither money; neither have two coats apiece.
4 Whatsoever house you enter into, there abide, and there depart.
5 Whosoever will not receive you, when you go out of that city,
shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them.
6 They departed, and went through the towns, preaching the gospel,
and healing every where.
7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him: and he was perplexed,
because that it was said of some, that John was risen from the dead;
8 Of some, that Elias had appeared; and of others, that one of the old prophets was risen
again.
9 Herod said, John have I beheaded: but who is this, of whom I hear such things?
And he desired to see him.
10 The apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they had done.
And he took them, and went aside privately into a desert place belonging to the city
called Bethsaida.
11 The people, when they knew it, followed him: and he received them,
and spoke unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that had need of healing.
12 When the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and said unto him,
Send the multitude away, that they may go into the towns and country round about,
and lodge, and get victuals: for we are here in a desert place.
13 But he said unto them, Give you them to eat. And they said,
We have no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we should go and buy meat for all
this people.
14 For they were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples,
Make them sit down by fifties in a company.
15 They did so, and made them all sit down.
16 Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven,
he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude.
17 They did eat, and were all filled: and there was taken up of fragments that remained
to them twelve baskets.
18 As he was alone praying, his disciples were with him: and he asked them, saying,
Whom say the people that I am?
19 They answering said, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias;
and others say, that one of the old prophets is risen again.
20 He said unto them, But whom say you that I am? Peter answering said,
The Christ of God.
21 He strictly charged them, and commanded them to tell no man that thing;
22 Saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders and
chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised the third day.
23 He said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his cross daily, and follow me.
24 For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his life for
my sake, the same shall save it.
25 For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself,
or be cast away?
26 For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words,
of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory,
and in his Father’s, and of the holy angels.
27 But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here,
which shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God.
28 About an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter and John and James,
and went up into a mountain to pray.
29 As he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered,
and his clothing was white and glistering.
30 And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias:
31 Who appeared in glory, and spoke of his decease which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem.
32 But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: and when they were awake,
they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with him.
33 As they departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master,
it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles;
one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elias: not knowing what he said.
34 While he thus spoke, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them: and they feared as
they entered into the cloud.
35 There came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him.
36 When the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And they kept it close,
and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen.
37 That on the next day, when they were come down from the hill, much people met him.
38 And, behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, Master, please,
look upon my son: for he is mine only child.
39 And, lo, a spirit takes him, and he suddenly cries out;
and it tears him that he foams again, and bruising him hardly departs from him.
40 I besought your disciples to cast him out; and they could not.
41 Jesus answering said, O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you, and suffer you? Bring your son here.
42 As he was yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare him.
And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child,
and delivered him again to his father.
43 They were all amazed at the mighty power of God.
But while they wondered every one at all things which Jesus did,
he said unto his disciples,
44 Let these sayings sink down into your ears: for the Son of man shall be delivered into
the hands of men.
45 But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them,
that they perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying.
46 Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be greatest.
47 Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took a child, and set him by him,
48 Said unto them, Whosoever shall receive this child in my name receives me: and
whosoever shall receive me receives him that sent me: for he that is least among you all,
the same shall be great.
49 John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out devils in your name;
and we forbad him, because he follows not with us.
50 Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not: for he that is not against us is for us.
51 When the time was come that he should be received up,
he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem,
52 Sent messengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a village of the
Samaritans, to make ready for him.
53 They did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem.
54 When his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord,
will you that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them,
even as Elias did?
55 But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, you know not what manner of spirit you are
of.
56 For the Son of man is not come to destroy men’s lives, but to save them.
And they went to another village.
57 That, as they went in the way, a certain man said unto him, Lord,
I will follow you whithersoever you go.
58 Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests;
but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.
59 He said unto another, Follow me. But he said, Lord,
suffer me first to go and bury my father.
60 Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead: but go you and preach the kingdom
of God.
61 Another also said, Lord, I will follow you; but let me first go bid them farewell,
which are at home at my house.
62 Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back,
is fit for the kingdom of God.

Chapter 10

1 After these things the LORD appointed other seventy also,
and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place,
where he himself would come.
2 Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly is great,
but the labourers are few: pray you therefore the Lord of the harvest,
that he would send forth labourers into his harvest.
3 Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves.
4 Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way.
5 Into whatsoever house you enter, first say, Peace be to this house.
6 If the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not,
it shall turn to you again.
7 In the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the
labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house.
8 Into whatsoever city you enter, and they receive you,
eat such things as are set before you:
9 Heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them,
The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
10 But into whatsoever city you enter, and they receive you not,
go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say,
11 Even the very dust of your city, which cleaves on us,
we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding be you sure of this,
that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
12 But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom,
than for that city.
13 Woe unto you, Chorazin! woe unto you, Bethsaida!
for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you,
they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
14 But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you.
15 You, Capernaum, which are exalted to heaven, shall be thrust down to hell.
16 He that hears you hears me; and he that despises you despises me;
and he that despises me despises him that sent me.
17 The seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord,
even the devils are subject unto us through your name.
18 He said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven.
19 Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions,
and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
20 Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you;
but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.
21 In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank you, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto babes: even so, Father;
for so it seemed good in your sight.
22 All things are delivered to me of my Father: and no man knows who the Son is,
but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son,
and he to whom the Son will reveal him.
23 He turned him unto his disciples, and said privately,
Blessed are the eyes which see the things that you see:
24 For I tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which
you see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which you hear,
and have not heard them.
25 And, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life?
26 He said unto him, What is written in the law? how read you?
27 He answering said, you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart,
and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind;
and your neighbour as yourself.
28 He said unto him, you have answered right: this do, and you shall live.
29 But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbour?
30 Jesus answering said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho,
and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his clothing, and wounded him,
and departed, leaving him half dead.
31 By chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him,
he passed by on the other side.
32 Likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him,
and passed by on the other side.
33 But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him,
he had compassion on him,
34 Went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine,
and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
35 On the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host,
and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever you spend more, when I come again,
I will repay you.
36 Which now of these three, think you, was neighbour unto him that fell among the
thieves?
37 He said, He that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go,
and do you likewise.
38 Now as they went, that he entered into a certain village: and a certain woman named
Martha received him into her house.
39 She had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word.
40 But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said, Lord,
do you not care that my sister has left me to serve alone?
bid her therefore that she help me.
41 Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha,
you are careful and troubled about many things:
42 But one thing is needful: and Mary has chosen that good part,
which shall not be taken away from her.

Chapter 11

1 That, as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased,
one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray,
as John also taught his disciples.
2 He said unto them, When you pray, say, Our Father which are in heaven,
Hallowed be your name. your kingdom come. your will be done, as in heaven,
so in earth.
3 Give us day by day our daily bread.
4 Forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us.
And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil.
5 He said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight,
and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves;
6 For a friend of mine in his journey is come to me,
and I have nothing to set before him?
7 He from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not: the door is now shut,
and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give you.
8 I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend,
yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he needs.
9 I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
10 For every one that asks receives; and he that seeks finds;
and to him that knocks it shall be opened.
11 If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone?
or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?
12 Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion?
13 If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?
14 He was casting out a devil, and it was dumb. When the devil was gone out,
the dumb spoke; and the people wondered.
15 But some of them said, He casts out devils through Beelzebub the chief of the
devils.
16 Others, tempting him, sought of him a sign from heaven.
17 But he, knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself
is brought to desolation; and a house divided against a house falls.
18 If Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand?
because you say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub.
19 If I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out?
therefore shall they be your judges.
20 But if I with the finger of God cast out devils,
no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you.
21 When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace:
22 But when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him,
he takes from him all his armour wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils.
23 He that is not with me is against me: and he that gathers not with me scatters.
24 When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest; and finding none, he says, I will return unto my house where I came
out.
25 When he comes, he finds it swept and garnished.
26 Then goes he, and takes to him seven other spirits more wicked than himself;
and they enter in, and live there: and the last state of that man is worse than the
first.
27 As he spoke these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice,
and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that gave birth to you,
and the paps which you have sucked.
28 But he said, Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.
29 When the people were gathered thick together, he began to say,
This is an evil generation: they seek a sign; and there shall no sign be given it,
but the sign of Jonas the prophet.
30 For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this
generation.
31 The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation,
and condemn them: for she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of
Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon is here.
32 The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas;
and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here.
33 No man, when he has lighted a candle, putts it in a secret place,
neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which come in may see the
light.
34 The light of the body is the eye: therefore when your eye is single,
your whole body also is full of light; but when your eye is evil,
your body also is full of darkness.
35 Take heed therefore that the light which is in you be not darkness.
36 If your whole body therefore be full of light, having no part dark,
the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle does give you
light.
37 As he spoke, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him: and he went in,
and sat down to meat.
38 When the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner.
39 The Lord said unto him, Now do you Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the
platter; but your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness.
40 You fools, did not he that made that which is without make that which is within
also?
41 But rather give alms of such things as you have;
and, behold, all things are clean unto you.
42 But woe unto you, Pharisees! for you tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs,
and pass over judgment and the love of God: these owed you to have done,
and not to leave the other undone.
43 Woe unto you, Pharisees! for you love the uppermost seats in the synagogues,
and greetings in the markets.
44 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!
for you are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware of
them.
45 Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master,
thus saying you reproach us also.
46 He said, Woe unto you also, you lawyers! for you lade men with burdens grievous to be
borne, and you yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.
47 Woe unto you! for you build the sepulchres of the prophets,
and your fathers killed them.
48 Truly you bear witness that you allow the deeds of your fathers: for they indeed
killed them, and you build their sepulchres.
49 Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and apostles,
and some of them they shall kill and persecute:
50 That the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world,
may be required of this generation;
51 From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias which perished between the altar
and the temple: verily I say unto you, It shall be required of this generation.
52 Woe unto you, lawyers! for you have taken away the key of knowledge: you entered not
in yourselves, and them that were entering in you hindered.
53 As he said these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him
vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things:
54 Laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth,
that they might accuse him.

Chapter 12

1 In the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people,
insomuch that they trode one upon another, he began to say unto his disciples first of
all, Beware you of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
2 For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed;
neither hid, that shall not be known.
3 Therefore whatsoever you have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light;
and that which you have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the
housetops.
4 I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body,
and after that have no more that they can do.
5 But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear: Fear him,
which after he has killed has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him.
6 Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before
God?
7 But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
Fear not therefore: you are of more value than many sparrows.
8 Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men,
him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God:
9 But he that denies me before men shall be denied before the angels of God.
10 Whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man,
it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemes against the Holy Ghost it shall
not be forgiven.
11 When they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers,
take you no thought how or what thing you shall answer, or what you shall say:
12 For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what you owed to say.
13 One of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my brother,
that he divide the inheritance with me.
14 He said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?
15 He said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man’s life consists
not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
16 He spoke a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth
plentifully:
17 He thought within himself, saying, What shall I do,
because I have no room where to bestow my fruits?
18 He said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater;
and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods.
19 I will say to my soul, Soul, you have much goods laid up for many years;
take your ease, eat, drink, and be merry.
20 But God said unto him, you fool, this night your soul shall be required of you: then
whose shall those things be, which you have provided?
21 So is he that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.
22 He said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life,
what you shall eat; neither for the body, what you shall put on.
23 The life is more than meat, and the body is more than clothing.
24 Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap;
which neither have storehouse nor barn; and God feeds them: how much more are you better
than the fowls?
25 Which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one cubit?
26 If you then be not able to do that thing which is least,
why take you thought for the rest?
27 Consider the lilies how they grow: they toil not, they spin not;
and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these.
28 If then God so clothe the grass, which is to day in the field,
and to morrow is cast into the oven; how much more will he clothe you,
O you of little faith?
29 Seek not you what you shall eat, or what you shall drink,
neither be you of doubtful mind.
30 For all these things do the nations of the world seek after: and your Father knows
that you have need of these things.
31 But rather seek you the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be added unto
you.
32 Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the
kingdom.
33 Sell that you have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old,
a treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches,
neither moth corrupts.
34 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
35 Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning;
36 You yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord,
when he will return from the wedding; that when he comes and knocks,
they may open unto him immediately.
37 Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he comes shall find watching: verily I
say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat,
and will come forth and serve them.
38 If he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them so,
blessed are those servants.
39 This know, that if the goodman of the house had known what hour the thief would come,
he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through.
40 Be you therefore ready also: for the Son of man comes at an hour when you think
not.
41 Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speak you this parable unto us, or even to all?
42 The Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward,
whom his lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in
due season?
43 Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he comes shall find so doing.
44 Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he has.
45 But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delays his coming;
and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens, and to eat and drink,
and to be drunken;
46 The lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for him,
and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder,
and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers.
47 That servant, which knew his lord’s will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
48 But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given,
of him shall be much required: and to whom men have committed much,
of him they will ask the more.
49 I am come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if it be already kindled?
50 But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened till it be
accomplished!
51 Suppose you that I am come to give peace on earth?
I tell you, Nay; but rather division:
52 For from from now on there shall be five in one house divided, three against two,
and two against three.
53 The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father;
the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother;
the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother
in law.
54 He said also to the people, When you see a cloud rise out of the west,
straightway you say, There comes a shower; and so it is.
55 When you see the south wind blow, you say, There will be heat;
and it comes to pass.
56 You hypocrites, you can discern the face of the sky and of the earth;
but how is it that you do not discern this time?
57 Yea, and why even of yourselves judge you not what is right?
58 When you go with your adversary to the magistrate, as you are in the way,
give diligence that you may be delivered from him; lest he hale you to the judge,
and the judge deliver you to the officer, and the officer cast you into prison.
59 I tell you, you shall not depart there, till you have paid the very last mite.

Chapter 13

1 There were present at that season some that told him of the Galilaeans,
whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.
2 Jesus answering said unto them, Suppose you that these Galilaeans were sinners above
all the Galilaeans, because they suffered such things?
3 I tell you, Nay: but, except you repent, you shall all likewise perish.
4 Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and killed them,
think you that they were sinners above all men that lived in Jerusalem?
5 I tell you, Nay: but, except you repent, you shall all likewise perish.
6 He spoke also this parable; A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard;
and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.
7 Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold,
these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down;
why cumbers it the ground?
8 He answering said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also,
till I shall dig about it, and dung it:
9 If it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that you shall cut it down.
10 He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath.
11 And, behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years,
and was bowed together, and could in no wise lifted up herself.
12 When Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said unto her, Woman,
you are loosed from your infirmity.
13 He laid his hands on her: and immediately she was made straight,
and glorified God.
14 The ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation,
because that Jesus had healed on the sabbath day, and said unto the people,
There are six days in which men owed to work: in them therefore come and be healed,
and not on the sabbath day.
15 The Lord then answered him, and said, you hypocrite,
does not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall,
and lead him away to watering?
16 Owed not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound, lo,
these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?
17 When he had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed: and all the people
rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.
18 Then said he, Unto what is the kingdom of God like?
and whereunto shall I resemble it?
19 It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and cast into his garden;
and it grew, and waxed a great tree; and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of
it.
20 Again he said, Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God?
21 It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal,
till the whole was leavened.
22 He went through the cities and villages, teaching,
and journeying toward Jerusalem.
23 Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto them,
24 Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
25 When once the master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door,
and you begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord,
open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not where you are:
26 Then shall you begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in your presence,
and you have taught in our streets.
27 But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not where you are;
depart from me, all you workers of iniquity.
28 There shall be weeping and gnashing of tes, when you shall see Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God,
and you yourselves thrust out.
29 They shall come from the east, and from the west, and from the north,
and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.
30 And, behold, there are last which shall be first,
and there are first which shall be last.
31 The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get you out,
and depart hence: for Herod will kill you.
32 He said unto them, Go you, and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils,
and I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.
33 Nevertheless I must walk to day, and to morrow, and the day following: for it cannot
be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.
34 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which kill the prophets,
and stone them that are sent unto you; how often would I have gathered your children
together, as a hen does gather her brood under her wings, and you would not!
35 Behold, your house is left unto you desolate: and verily I say unto you,
you shall not see me, until the time come when you shall say,
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Chapter 14

1 As he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath
day, that they watched him.
2 And, behold, there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy.
3 Jesus answering spoke unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying,
Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?
4 They held their peace. And he took him, and healed him, and let him go;
5 Answered them, saying, Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit,
and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?
6 They could not answer him again to these things.
7 He put forth a parable to those which were bidden,
when he marked how they chose out the chief rooms; saying unto them,
8 When you are bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room;
lest a more honourable man than you be bidden of him;
9 He that bade you and him come and say to you, Give this man place;
and you begin with shame to take the lowest room.
10 But when you are bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room;
that when he that bade you comes, he may say unto you, Friend,
go up higher: then shall you have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with
you.
11 For whosoever exalts himself shall be abased; and he that humbles himself shall be
exalted.
12 Then said he also to him that bade him, When you make a dinner or a supper,
call not your friends, nor your brethren, neither your kinsmen, nor your rich neighbours;
lest they also bid you again, and a recompence be made you.
13 But when you make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind:
14 You shall be blessed; for they cannot recompense you: for you shall be recompensed at
the resurrection of the just.
15 When one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said unto him,
Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God.
16 Then said he unto him, A certain man made a great supper, and bade many:
17 Sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come;
for all things are now ready.
18 They all with one consent began to make excuse. The first said unto him,
I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it: please have me
excused.
19 Another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them: please have me
excused.
20 Another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.
21 So that servant came, and showed his lord these things.
Then the master of the house being angry said to his servant,
Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in here the poor,
and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.
22 The servant said, Lord, it is done as you have commanded, and yet there is room.
23 The lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges,
and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.
24 For I say unto you, That none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my
supper.
25 There went great multitudes with him: and he turned, and said unto them,
26 If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children,
and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.
27 Whosoever does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple.
28 For which of you, intending to build a tower, sits not down first,
and counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it?
29 Lest haply, after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it,
all that behold it begin to mock him,
30 Saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish.
31 Or what king, going to make war against another king, sits not down first,
and consults whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with
twenty thousand?
32 Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an ambassage,
and desires conditions of peace.
33 So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has,
he cannot be my disciple.
34 Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his savour,
with which shall it be seasoned?
35 It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill; but men cast it out.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

Chapter 15

1 Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him.
2 The Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receives sinners,
and eats with them.
3 He spoke this parable unto them, saying,
4 What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them,
does not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost,
until he find it?
5 When he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
6 When he comes home, he calls together his friends and neighbours, saying unto them,
Rejoice with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost.
7 I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents,
more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance.
8 Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece,
does not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it?
9 When she has found it, she calls her friends and her neighbours together, saying,
Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I had lost.
10 Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one
sinner that repents.
11 He said, A certain man had two sons:
12 The younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that
falls to me. And he divided unto them his living.
13 Not many days after the younger son gathered all together,
and took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with riotous
living.
14 When he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land;
and he began to be in want.
15 He went and joined himself to a citizen of that country;
and he sent him into his fields to feed swine.
16 He would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man
gave unto him.
17 When he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father’s have bread
enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger!
18 I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father,
I have sinned against heaven, and before you,
19 Am no more worthy to be called your son: make me as one of your hired servants.
20 He arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off,
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him.
21 The son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in your sight,
and am no more worthy to be called your son.
22 But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him;
and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet:
23 Bring here the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry:
24 For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.
And they began to be merry.
25 Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the house,
he heard musick and dancing.
26 He called one of the servants, and asked what these things meant.
27 He said unto him, your brother is come; and your father has killed the fatted calf,
because he has received him safe and sound.
28 He was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his father out,
and intreated him.
29 He answering said to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve you,
neither transgressed I at any time your commandment: and yet you never gave me a kid,
that I might make merry with my friends:
30 But as soon as this your son was come, which has devoured your living with harlots,
you have killed for him the fatted calf.
31 He said unto him, Son, you are ever with me, and all that I have is your.
32 It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this your brother was dead,
and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.

Chapter 16

1 He said also unto his disciples, There was a certain rich man, which had a steward;
and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods.
2 He called him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of you?
give an account of your stewardship; for you may be no longer steward.
3 Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do?
for my lord takes away from me the stewardship: I cannot dig; to beg I am ashamed.
4 I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship,
they may receive me into their houses.
5 So he called every one of his lord’s debtors unto him, and said unto the first,
How much owe you unto my lord?
6 He said, An hundred measures of oil. And he said unto him, Take your bill,
and sit down quickly, and write fifty.
7 Then said he to another, And how much owe you? And he said,
An hundred measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take your bill, and write eighty.
8 The lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely: for the children of
this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light.
9 I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness;
that, when you fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.
10 He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much: and he that is
unjust in the least is unjust also in much.
11 If therefore you have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon,
who will commit to your trust the true riches?
12 If you have not been faithful in that which is another man’s,
who shall give you that which is your own?
13 No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other;
or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other.
you cannot serve God and mammon.
14 The Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all these things: and they derided
him.
15 He said unto them, you are they which justify yourselves before men;
but God knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in
the sight of God.
16 The law and the prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom of God is
preached, and every man presses into it.
17 It is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle of the law to fail.
18 Whosoever putts away his wife, and marries another,
committs adultery: and whosoever marries her that is put away from her husband committs
adultery.
19 There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen,
and fared sumptuously every day:
20 There was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate,
full of sores,
21 Desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man’s table: moreover the
dogs came and licked his sores.
22 That the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham’s bosom: the rich man
also died, and was buried;
23 In hell he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham afar off,
and Lazarus in his bosom.
24 He cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue;
for I am tormented in this flame.
25 But Abraham said, Son, remember that you in your lifetime receivedst your good things,
and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and you are tormented.
26 Beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which
would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us,
that would come from there.
27 Then he said, please therefore, father, that you would send him to my father’s
house:
28 For I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them,
lest they also come into this place of torment.
29 Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.
30 He said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.
31 He said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

Chapter 17

1 Then said he unto the disciples, It is impossible but that offences will come: but woe
unto him, through whom they come!
2 It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones.
3 Take heed to yourselves: If your brother trespass against you, rebuke him;
and if he repent, forgive him.
4 If he trespass against you seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to
you, saying, I repent; you shall forgive him.
5 The apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.
6 The Lord said, If you had faith as a grain of mustard seed,
you might say unto this sycamine tree, Be you plucked up by the root,
and be you planted in the sea; and it should obey you.
7 But which of you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle,
will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down to meat?
8 Will not rather say unto him, Make ready with which I may sup, and gird yourself,
and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; and afterward you shall eat and drink?
9 Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him?
I trow not.
10 So likewise you, when you shall have done all those things which are commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.
11 As he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.
12 As he entered into a certain village, there met him ten men that were lepers,
which stood afar off:
13 They lifted up their voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.
14 When he saw them, he said unto them, Go show yourselves unto the priests.
that, as they went, they were cleansed.
15 One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back,
and with a loud voice glorified God,
16 Fell down on his face at his feet, giving him thanks: and he was a Samaritan.
17 Jesus answering said, Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?
18 There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger.
19 He said unto him, Arise, go your way: your faith has made you whole.
20 When he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come,
he answered them and said, The kingdom of God comes not with observation:
21 Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold,
the kingdom of God is within you.
22 He said unto the disciples, The days will come, when you shall desire to see one of
the days of the Son of man, and you shall not see it.
23 They shall say to you, See here; or, see there: go not after them,
nor follow them.
24 For as the lightning, that lightens out of the one part under heaven,
shines unto the other part under heaven; so shall also the Son of man be in his day.
25 But first must he suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation.
26 As it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man.
27 They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage,
until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came,
and destroyed them all.
28 Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought,
they sold, they planted, they built;
29 But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven,
and destroyed them all.
30 Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed.
31 In that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and his goods in the house,
let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in the field,
let him likewise not return back.
32 Remember Lot’s wife.
33 Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it;
and whosoever shall lose his life shall preserve it.
34 I tell you, in that night there shall be two men in one bed;
the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left.
35 Two women shall be grinding together; the one shall be taken, and the other left.
36 Two men shall be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left.
37 They answered and said unto him, Where, Lord? And he said unto them,
Wheresoever the body is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

Chapter 18

1 He spoke a parable unto them to this end, that men owed always to pray,
and not to faint;
2 Saying, There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man:
3 There was a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying,
Avenge me of mine adversary.
4 He would not for a while: but afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God,
nor regard man;
5 Yet because this widow troubles me, I will avenge her,
lest by her continual coming she weary me.
6 The Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge says.
7 Shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him,
though he bear long with them?
8 I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless when the Son of man comes,
shall he find faith on the earth?
9 He spoke this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they were
righteous, and despised others:
10 Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee,
and the other a publican.
11 The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank you,
that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even as this publican.
12 I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess.
13 The publican, standing afar off, would not lifted up so much as his eyes unto heaven,
but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.
14 I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other: for every
one that exalts himself shall be abased; and he that humbles himself shall be
exalted.
15 They brought unto him also infants, that he would touch them: but when his disciples
saw it, they rebuked them.
16 But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Suffer little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.
17 Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little
child shall in no wise enter therein.
18 A certain ruler asked him, saying, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal
life?
19 Jesus said unto him, Why call you me good? none is good, save one, that is, God.
20 You know the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal,
Do not bear false witness, Honour your father and your mother.
21 He said, All these have I kept from my youth up.
22 Now when Jesus heard these things, he said unto him,
Yet lack you one thing: sell all that you have, and distribute unto the poor,
and you shall have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me.
23 When he heard this, he was very sorrowful: for he was very rich.
24 When Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he said,
How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!
25 For it is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye,
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
26 They that heard it said, Who then can be saved?
27 He said, The things which are impossible with men are possible with God.
28 Then Peter said, Lo, we have left all, and followed you.
29 He said unto them, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that has left house,
or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God’s sake,
30 Who shall not receive manifold more in this present time,
and in the world to come life everlasting.
31 Then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem,
and all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man shall be
accomplished.
32 For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked,
and spitefully entreated, and spitted on:
33 They shall scourge him, and put him to death: and the third day he shall rise
again.
34 They understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from them,
neither knew they the things which were spoken.
35 That as he was come nigh unto Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the way side
begging:
36 Hearing the multitude pass by, he asked what it meant.
37 They told him, that Jesus of Nazars passes by.
38 He cried, saying, Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me.
39 They which went before rebuked him, that he should hold his peace: but he cried so
much the more, you son of David, have mercy on me.
40 Jesus stood, and commanded him to be brought unto him: and when he was come near,
he asked him,
41 Saying, What will you that I shall do unto you? And he said, Lord,
that I may receive my sight.
42 Jesus said unto him, Receive your sight: your faith has saved you.
43 Immediately he received his sight, and followed him,
glorifying God: and all the people, when they saw it, gave praise unto God.

Chapter 19

1 Jesus entered and passed through Jericho.
2 And, behold, there was a man named Zacchaeus, which was the chief among the publicans,
and he was rich.
3 He sought to see Jesus who he was; and could not for the press,
because he was little of stature.
4 He ran before, and climbed up into a sycomore tree to see him: for he was to pass that
way.
5 When Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said unto him, Zacchaeus,
make haste, and come down; for to day I must abide at your house.
6 He made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully.
7 When they saw it, they all murmured, saying, That he was gone to be guest with a man
that is a sinner.
8 Zacchaeus stood, and said unto the Lord: Behold, Lord,
the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by
false accusation, I restore him fourfold.
9 Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house,
forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham.
10 For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.
11 As they heard these things, he added and spoke a parable,
because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God should
immediately appear.
12 He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a
kingdom, and to return.
13 He called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them,
Occupy till I come.
14 But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying,
We will not have this man to reign over us.
15 That when he was returned, having received the kingdom,
then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he had given the money,
that he might know how much every man had gained by trading.
16 Then came the first, saying, Lord, your pound has gained ten pounds.
17 He said unto him, Well, you good servant: because you have been faithful in a very
little, have you authority over ten cities.
18 The second came, saying, Lord, your pound has gained five pounds.
19 He said likewise to him, Be you also over five cities.
20 Another came, saying, Lord, behold, here is your pound,
which I have kept laid up in a napkin:
21 For I feared you, because you are an austere man: you take up that you layedst not
down, and reap that you did not sow.
22 He says unto him, Out of your own mouth will I judge you, you wicked servant.
you knew that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid not down,
and reaping that I did not sow:
23 Wherefore then gave not you my money into the bank,
that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury?
24 He said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound,
and give it to him that has ten pounds.
25 (And they said unto him, Lord, he has ten pounds.)
26 For I say unto you, That unto every one which has shall be given;
and from him that has not, even that he has shall be taken away from him.
27 But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring here,
and kill them before me.
28 When he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem.
29 When he was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount called the mount of
Olives, he sent two of his disciples,
30 Saying, Go you into the village over against you;
in which at your entering you shall find a colt tied,
whereon yet never man sat: loose him, and bring him here.
31 If any man ask you, Why do you loose him? thus shall you say unto him,
Because the Lord has need of him.
32 They that were sent went their way, and found even as he had said unto them.
33 As they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said unto them,
Why loose you the colt?
34 They said, The Lord has need of him.
35 They brought him to Jesus: and they cast their garments upon the colt,
and they set Jesus thereon.
36 As he went, they spread their clothes in the way.
37 When he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount of Olives,
the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice
for all the mighty works that they had seen;
38 Saying, Blessed be the King that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven,
and glory in the highest.
39 Some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said unto him, Master,
rebuke your disciples.
40 He answered and said unto them, I tell you that, if these should hold their peace,
the stones would immediately cry out.
41 When he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it,
42 Saying, If you had known, even you, at least in this your day,
the things which belong unto your peace! but now they are hid from your eyes.
43 For the days shall come upon you, that your enemies shall cast a trench about you,
and compass you round, and keep you in on every side,
44 Shall lay you even with the ground, and your children within you;
and they shall not leave in you one stone upon another;
because you knew not the time of your visitation.
45 He went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold therein,
and them that bought;
46 Saying unto them, It is written, My house is the house of prayer: but you have made it
a den of thieves.
47 He taught daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the chief of
the people sought to destroy him,
48 Could not find what they might do: for all the people were very attentive to hear
him.

Chapter 20

1 That on one of those days, as he taught the people in the temple,
and preached the gospel, the chief priests and the scribes came upon him with the
elders,
2 Spoke unto him, saying, Tell us, by what authority do you these things?
or who is he that gave you this authority?
3 He answered and said unto them, I will also ask you one thing; and answer me:
4 The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?
5 They reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven;
he will say, Why then believed you him not?
6 But and if we say, Of men; all the people will stone us: for they be persuaded that
John was a prophet.
7 They answered, that they could not tell where it was.
8 Jesus said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.
9 Then began he to speak to the people this parable;
A certain man planted a vineyard, and let it forth to husbandmen,
and went into a far country for a long time.
10 At the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen,
that they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard: but the husbandmen beat him,
and sent him away empty.
11 Again he sent another servant: and they beat him also, and entreated him shamefully,
and sent him away empty.
12 Again he sent a third: and they wounded him also, and cast him out.
13 Then said the lord of the vineyard, What shall I do?
I will send my beloved son: it may be they will reverence him when they see him.
14 But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying,
This is the heir: come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.
15 So they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
What therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them?
16 He shall come and destroy these husbandmen, and shall give the vineyard to others.
And when they heard it, they said, God forbid.
17 He beheld them, and said, What is this then that is written,
The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner?
18 Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be broken;
but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.
19 The chief priests and the scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on him;
and they feared the people: for they perceived that he had spoken this parable against
them.
20 They watched him, and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just men,
that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him unto the power and
authority of the governor.
21 They asked him, saying, Master, we know that you say and teach rightly,
neither accept you the person of any, but teach the way of God truly:
22 Is it lawful for us to give tribute unto Caesar, or no?
23 But he perceived their craftiness, and said unto them, Why tempt you me?
24 Show me a penny. Whose image and superscription has it?
They answered and said, Caesar’s.
25 He said unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which be Caesar’s,
and unto God the things which be God’s.
26 They could not take hold of his words before the people: and they marvelled at his
answer, and held their peace.
27 Then came to him certain of the Sadducees, which deny that there is any resurrection;
and they asked him,
28 Saying, Master, Moses wrote unto us, If any man’s brother die, having a wife,
and he die without children, that his brother should take his wife,
and raise up seed unto his brother.
29 There were therefore seven brethren: and the first took a wife,
and died without children.
30 The second took her to wife, and he died childless.
31 The third took her; and in like manner the seven also: and they left no children,
and died.
32 Last of all the woman died also.
33 Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she?
for seven had her to wife.
34 Jesus answering said unto them, The children of this world marry,
and are given in marriage:
35 But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world,
and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage:
36 Neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels;
and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.
37 Now that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush,
when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob.
38 For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living: for all live unto him.
39 Then certain of the scribes answering said, Master, you have well said.
40 After that they dared not ask him any question at all.
41 He said unto them, How say they that Christ is David’s son?
42 David himself says in the book of Psalms, The LORD said unto my Lord,
Sit you on my right hand,
43 Till I make your enemies your footstool.
44 David therefore calls him Lord, how is he then his son?
45 Then in the audience of all the people he said unto his disciples,
46 Beware of the scribes, which desire to walk in long robes,
and love greetings in the markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues,
and the chief rooms at feasts;
47 Which devour widows’ houses, and for a show make long prayers: the same shall receive
greater damnation.

Chapter 21

1 He looked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury.
2 He saw also a certain poor widow casting in there two mites.
3 He said, Of a truth I say unto you, that this poor widow has cast in more than they
all:
4 For all these have of their abundance cast in unto the offerings of God: but she of her
penury has cast in all the living that she had.
5 As some spoke of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones and gifts,
he said,
6 As for these things which you behold, the days will come,
in which there shall not be left one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down.
7 They asked him, saying, Master, but when shall these things be?
and what sign will there be when these things shall come to pass?
8 He said, Take heed that you be not deceived: for many shall come in my name, saying,
I am Christ; and the time draws near: go you not therefore after them.
9 But when you shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified: for these things must
first come to pass; but the end is not by and by.
10 Then said he unto them, Nation shall rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom:
11 Great earthquakes shall be in divers places, and famines, and pestilences;
and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven.
12 But before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you,
delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons,
being brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake.
13 It shall turn to you for a testimony.
14 Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what you shall answer:
15 For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able
to gainsay nor resist.
16 You shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends;
and some of you shall they cause to be put to death.
17 You shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake.
18 But there shall not an hair of your head perish.
19 In your patience possess you your souls.
20 When you shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies,
then know that the desolation thereof is nigh.
21 Then let them which are in Judaea flee to the mountains;
and let them which are in the midst of it depart out;
and let not them that are in the countries enter thereinto.
22 For these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be
fulfilled.
23 But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in those days!
for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people.
24 They shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all
nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles,
until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.
25 There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars;
and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity;
the sea and the waves roaring;
26 Men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken.
27 Then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
28 When these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lifted up your heads;
for your redemption draws nigh.
29 He spoke to them a parable; Behold the fig tree, and all the trees;
30 When they now shoot forth, you see and know of your own selves that summer is now nigh
at hand.
31 So likewise you, when you see these things come to pass,
know you that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand.
32 Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass away, till all be fulfilled.
33 Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass away.
34 Take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting,
and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.
35 For as a snare shall it come on all them that live on the face of the whole earth.
36 Watch you therefore, and pray always, that you may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.
37 In the day time he was teaching in the temple; and at night he went out,
and abode in the mount that is called the mount of Olives.
38 All the people came early in the morning to him in the temple, for to hear him.

Chapter 22

1 Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the Passover.
2 The chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill him;
for they feared the people.
3 Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve.
4 He went his way, and communed with the chief priests and captains,
how he might betray him unto them.
5 They were glad, and covenanted to give him money.
6 He promised, and sought opportunity to betray him unto them in the absence of the
multitude.
7 Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be killed.
8 He sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the passover, that we may eat.
9 They said unto him, Where will you that we prepare?
10 He said unto them, Behold, when you are entered into the city,
there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water;
follow him into the house where he enters in.
11 You shall say unto the goodman of the house, The Master says unto you,
Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?
12 He shall show you a large upper room furnished: there make ready.
13 They went, and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready the passover.
14 When the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him.
15 He said unto them, With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I
suffer:
16 For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof,
until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.
17 He took the cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this,
and divide it among yourselves:
18 For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine,
until the kingdom of God shall come.
19 He took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying,
This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me.
20 Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood,
which is shed for you.
21 But, behold, the hand of him that betrays me is with me on the table.
22 Truly the Son of man goes, as it was determined: but woe unto that man by whom he is
betrayed!
23 They began to enquire among themselves, which of them it was that should do this
thing.
24 There was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the
greatest.
25 He said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them;
and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors.
26 But you shall not be so: but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger;
and he that is chief, as he that does serve.
27 For whether is greater, he that sits at meat, or he that serves?
is not he that sits at meat? but I am among you as he that serves.
28 You are they which have continued with me in my temptations.
29 I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me;
30 That you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom,
and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
31 The Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you,
that he may sift you as wheat:
32 But I have prayed for you, that your faith fail not: and when you are converted,
strengthen your brethren.
33 He said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with you, both into prison, and to death.
34 He said, I tell you, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day,
before that you shall thrice deny that you know me.
35 He said unto them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes,
lacked you any thing? And they said, Nothing.
36 Then said he unto them, But now, he that has a purse, let him take it,
and likewise his scrip: and he that has no sword, let him sell his garment,
and buy one.
37 For I say unto you, that this that is written must yet be accomplished in me,
And he was reckoned among the transgressors: for the things concerning me have an
end.
38 They said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said unto them, It is enough.
39 He came out, and went, as he was wont, to the mount of Olives;
and his disciples also followed him.
40 When he was at the place, he said unto them, Pray that you enter not into
temptation.
41 He was withdrawn from them about a stone’s cast, and kneeled down, and prayed,
42 Saying, Father, if you be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will,
but your, be done.
43 There appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.
44 Being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops
of blood falling down to the ground.
45 When he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples,
he found them sleeping for sorrow,
46 Said unto them, Why sleep you? rise and pray, lest you enter into temptation.
47 While he yet spoke, behold a multitude, and he that was called Judas,
one of the twelve, went before them, and drew near unto Jesus to kiss him.
48 But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betray you the Son of man with a kiss?
49 When they which were about him saw what would follow, they said unto him, Lord,
shall we smite with the sword?
50 One of them smote the servant of the high priest, and cut off his right ear.
51 Jesus answered and said, Suffer you thus far. And he touched his ear,
and healed him.
52 Then Jesus said unto the chief priests, and captains of the temple, and the elders,
which were come to him, Be you come out, as against a thief, with swords and staves?
53 When I was daily with you in the temple, you stretched forth no hands against me: but
this is your hour, and the power of darkness.
54 Then took they him, and led him, and brought him into the high priest’s house.
And Peter followed afar off.
55 When they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and were set down together,
Peter sat down among them.
56 But a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and earnestly looked upon him,
and said, This man was also with him.
57 He denied him, saying, Woman, I know him not.
58 After a little while another saw him, and said, you are also of them.
And Peter said, Man, I am not.
59 About the space of one hour after another confidently affirmed, saying,
Of a truth this fellow also was with him: for he is a Galilaean.
60 Peter said, Man, I know not what you say. And immediately, while he yet spoke,
the cock crew.
61 The Lord turned, and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord,
how he had said unto him, Before the cock crow, you shall deny me thrice.
62 Peter went out, and wept bitterly.
63 The men that held Jesus mocked him, and smote him.
64 When they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him, saying,
Prophesy, who is it that smote you?
65 Many other things blasphemously spoke they against him.
66 As soon as it was day, the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes
came together, and led him into their council, saying,
67 Are you the Christ? tell us. And he said unto them, If I tell you,
you will not believe:
68 If I also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go.
69 Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God.
70 Then said they all, are you then the Son of God?
And he said unto them, you say that I am.
71 They said, What need we any further witness? for we ourselves have heard of his own
mouth.

Chapter 23

1 The whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate.
2 They began to accuse him, saying, We found this fellow perverting the nation,
and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ a King.
3 Pilate asked him, saying, are you the King of the Jews?
And he answered him and said, you say it.
4 Then said Pilate to the chief priests and to the people,
I find no fault in this man.
5 They were the more fierce, saying, He stirrs up the people,
teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning from Galilee to this place.
6 When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galilaean.
7 As soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod,
who himself also was at Jerusalem at that time.
8 When Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he was desirous to see him of a long
season, because he had heard many things of him; and he hoped to have seen some miracle
done by him.
9 Then he questioned with him in many words; but he answered him nothing.
10 The chief priests and scribes stood and vehemently accused him.
11 Herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked him,
and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate.
12 The same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together: for before they were at
enmity between themselves.
13 Pilate, when he had called together the chief priests and the rulers and the
people,
14 Said unto them, you have brought this man unto me,
as one that perverts the people: and, behold, I, having examined him before you,
have found no fault in this man touching those things of which you accuse him:
15 No, nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him; and, lo,
nothing worthy of death is done unto him.
16 I will therefore chastise him, and release him.
17 (For of necessity he must release one unto them at the feast.)
18 They cried out all at once, saying, Away with this man,
and release unto us Barabbas:
19 (Who for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder,
was cast into prison.)
20 Pilate therefore, willing to release Jesus, spoke again to them.
21 But they cried, saying, Crucify him, crucify him.
22 He said unto them the third time, Why, what evil has he done?
I have found no cause of death in him: I will therefore chastise him, and let him go.
23 They were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be crucified.
And the voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed.
24 Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.
25 He released unto them him that for sedition and murder was cast into prison,
whom they had desired; but he delivered Jesus to their will.
26 As they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon, a Cyrenian,
coming out of the country, and on him they laid the cross,
that he might bear it after Jesus.
27 There followed him a great company of people, and of women,
which also bewailed and lamented him.
28 But Jesus turning unto them said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me,
but weep for yourselves, and for your children.
29 For, behold, the days are coming, in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren,
and the wombs that never gave birth to, and the paps which never gave suck.
30 Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us;
and to the hills, Cover us.
31 For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?
32 There were also two other, malefactors, led with him to be put to death.
33 When they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there they crucified him,
and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on the left.
34 Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.
And they parted his clothing, and cast lots.
35 The people stood beholding. And the rulers also with them derided him, saying,
He saved others; let him save himself, if he be Christ, the chosen of God.
36 The soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him vinegar,
37 Saying, If you be the king of the Jews, save yourself.
38 A superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew,
THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
39 One of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying, If you be Christ,
save yourself and us.
40 But the other answering rebuked him, saying, do not you fear God,
seeing you are in the same condemnation?
41 We indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man has done
nothing amiss.
42 He said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when you come into your kingdom.
43 Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto you, To day shall you be with me in
paradise.
44 It was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness over all the earth until the
ninth hour.
45 The sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst.
46 When Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father,
into your hands I commend my spirit: and having said thus, he gave up the ghost.
47 Now when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying,
Certainly this was a righteous man.
48 All the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which were done,
smote their breasts, and returned.
49 All his acquaintance, and the women that followed him from Galilee, stood afar off,
beholding these things.
50 And, behold, there was a man named Joseph, a counsellor;
and he was a good man, and a just:
51 (The same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them;) he was of Arimathaea,
a city of the Jews: who also himself waited for the kingdom of God.
52 This man went unto Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus.
53 He took it down, and wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a sepulchre that was hewn in
stone, wherein never man before was laid.
54 That day was the preparation, and the sabbath drew on.
55 The women also, which came with him from Galilee, followed after,
and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was laid.
56 They returned, and prepared spices and ointments;
and rested the sabbath day according to the commandment.

Chapter 24

1 Now upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning,
they came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared,
and certain others with them.
2 They found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre.
3 They entered in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus.
4 As they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in shining
garments:
5 As they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto them,
Why seek you the living among the dead?
6 He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spoke unto you when he was yet in
Galilee,
7 Saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men,
and be crucified, and the third day rise again.
8 They remembered his words,
9 Returned from the sepulchre, and told all these things unto the eleven,
and to all the rest.
10 It was Mary Magdalene and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James,
and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the apostles.
11 Their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.
12 Then arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and stooping down,
he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed,
wondering in himself at that which was come to pass.
13 And, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus,
which was from Jerusalem about sixty furlongs.
14 They talked together of all these things which had happened.
15 That, while they communed together and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near,
and went with them.
16 But their eyes were held that they should not know him.
17 He said unto them, What manner of communications are these that you have one to
another, as you walk, and are sad?
18 The one of them, whose name was Cleopas, answering said unto him,
are you only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the things which are come to
pass there in these days?
19 He said unto them, What things? And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazars,
which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people:
20 How the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death,
and have crucified him.
21 But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel: and beside all
this, to day is the third day since these things were done.
22 Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished,
which were early at the sepulchre;
23 When they found not his body, they came, saying,
that they had also seen a vision of angels, which said that he was alive.
24 Certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre,
and found it even so as the women had said: but him they saw not.
25 Then he said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets
have spoken:
26 Owed not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
27 Beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures
the things concerning himself.
28 They drew nigh unto the village, where they went: and he made as though he would have
gone further.
29 But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us: for it is toward evening,
and the day is far spent. And he went in to stay with them.
30 As he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and blessed it, and brake,
and gave to them.
31 Their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight.
32 They said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us,
while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?
33 They rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem,
and found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them,
34 Saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon.
35 They told what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking
of bread.
36 As they thus spoke, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and says unto them,
Peace be unto you.
37 But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.
38 He said unto them, Why are you troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
39 Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see;
for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have.
40 When he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet.
41 While they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them,
Have you here any meat?
42 They gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb.
43 He took it, and did eat before them.
44 He said unto them, These are the words which I spoke unto you,
while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled,
which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms,
concerning me.
45 Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures,
46 Said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer,
and to rise from the dead the third day:
47 That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
48 You are witnesses of these things.
49 And, behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but stay you in the city of
Jerusalem, until you be endued with power from on high.
50 He led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands,
and blessed them.
51 While he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven.
52 They worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy:
53 Were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.